=== PAGE 1 ===
distrusting 
educational 
technology 
critical questions for changing times 
| 
4IDGF1LNOU

=== PAGE 2 ===
Digitized by the Internet Archive 
in 2023 with funding from 
Kahle/Austin Foundation 
https://archive.org/details/distrustingeduca0000selw 

=== PAGE 3 ===
DISTRUSTING EDUCATIONAL 
TECHNOLOGY 
Distrusting Educational Technology critically explores the optimistic consensus that 
has arisen around the use of digital technology in education. Drawing on a variety 
of theoretical and empirical perspectives, this book shows how apparently neutral 
forms of educational technology have actually served to align educational provi- 
sion and practices with neo-liberal values, thereby eroding the nature of education 
as a public good and moving it instead towards the individualistic tendencies of 
twenty-first-century capitalism. 
Following a wide-ranging interrogation of the ideological dimensions of educa- 
tional technology, this book examines in detail specific types of digital technol- 
ogy in use in education today, including virtual education, ‘open’ courses, digital 
games and social media. It then concludes with specific recommendations for 
fairer forms of educational technology. An ideal read for anyone interested in the 
fast-changing nature of contemporary education, Distrusting Educational Technology 
comprises an ambitious and much-needed critique. 
Neil Selwyn is Professor of Education at Monash University, Australia. 

=== PAGE 4 ===
Sas 
~ 
a oe — eavinlezam gtlcynlyy ceive yaeival) ywheney 
= < ew 0: Ge 
ppiinytD | 
alitaantine 
vir yoy ikea tityet laiigth to ea gel Elana 
sikede mal 
_ 
Ds Wier Gul vert dad all eammpgineg Wears kn lode went 
° alr i beeen oth, Ingth WAM Vistre Sart fp Areiber Virtottl abs ta wacagcitl ; 
oP wll 
wonld) 1. Ale pee Wey aiiles les te nes dl Worrew iaw toca = 
» 
erahicr 
im 
lh we olin 
favery ved iors RA hore iy vider iw. 
— 
—— 
Mitige: Yuin? 
wtb 
Thar yt 
—— 
a 
_ 
: ile 
™ 
a 
74 Nis ke~9iTe at Ico Lek rtatal i! Sigh ety w ihren 
—p aes 
Heit? 
np ot 
@ Te of qalttie Sold el qpciedgd-is? Gaon 
AM, 
Pets 
Leth, 
sain 
hee Generar 
Bale, mr seen a ng? 
ia 
ee 
eer 
eT) 
ee 
er 
oe 
par 
apron 
te’: 
dal 
Gadel 
@ 
Lovee. fiw to aurse} vented 
ay mo 
efierie” 
, 
eee 
tle 
<xnaae pete: 
Ina a? > fait i) oot 
: 
Lpoe 
ota 
eComnn ih eedtnles 
us 
Cquryiece 
7 
nN 
— 
en 
ret 
wT la weal 
oi wevilad lio 
a 
: 
: 
: 
— 
= 

=== PAGE 5 ===
DISTRUSTING 
EDUCATIONAL 
TECHNOLOGY 
Critical Questions 
for Changing Times 
Neil Selwyn 
Monash University, Australia 
Routledge 
Taylor & Francis Grou 
NEW YORK AND LONDON 

=== PAGE 6 ===
First published 2014 
by Routledge 
711 Third Avenue, New York, NY 10017 
and by Routledge 
2 Park Square, Milton Park, Abingdon, Oxon OX14 4RN 
Routledge is an imprint of the Taylor & Francis Group, an informa business 
© 2014 Taylor & Francis 
The right of Neil Selwyn to be identified as author of this work has been 
asserted by him in accordance with sections 77 and 78 of the Copyright, 
Designs and Patents Act 1988. 
All rights reserved. No part of this book may be reprinted or reproduced or 
utilised in any form or by any electronic, mechanical, or other means, now 
known or hereafter invented, including photocopying and recording, or in 
any information storage or retrieval system, without permission in writing 
from the publishers. 
Trademark notice: Product or corporate names may be trademarks or registered 
trademarks, and are used only for identification and explanation without 
intent to infringe. 
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data 
Selwyn, Neil. 
Distrusting educational technology : critical questions for changing times / 
Neil Selwyn. 
pages cm. 
Includes bibliographical references and index. 
1. Educational technology. 
2. Information technology. 
3. Internet in 
education. 
4. Digital media. 
5. Social media. 
I. Title. 
LB1028.3.S38882 
2013 
371.33—de23 
2013017407 
ISBN: 978-0-415-70799-2 (hbk) 
ISBN: 978-0-415-70800-5 (pbk) 
ISBN: 978-1-315-88635-0 (ebk) 
Typeset in Bembo 
by Apex CoVantage, LLC 

=== PAGE 7 ===
CONTENTS 
Preface 
Acknowledgements 
1 
Why Distrust Educational Technology? 
2 
Understanding Educational Technology as Ideology 
3 
Distrusting ‘Virtual’ Technologies in Education 
4 
 Distrusting ‘Open’ Technologies in Education 
5 
Distrusting ‘Games’ Technologies in Education 
6 
 Distrusting ‘Social’ Technologies in Education 
7 
Educational Technology: Continuities, Contradictions 
and Conflicts 
8 
Educational Technology: Is There an Alternative? 
References 
Index 
vit 
125 
144 
167 
189 

=== PAGE 8 ===
no 
a aecheacttal ta 
S 
6g 
© (ess 
y: | ‘its peta 
mie “aot 
“ie TA a Seg ie 
Vaal 
jet haba 
meme tw wgalegt ie 
=a 
25 
> 
i on) satliwene? Fi 
4 
“4 
~iivi 
_ 

=== PAGE 9 ===
PREFACE 
Unlike most other writing on the topic of education and technology, this is not a 
particularly hopeful or optimistic book. This is a book that paints an awkward and 
difficult picture of education in the digital age. Readers should not expect the en- 
thusiasm and praise that usually are directed towards ‘virtual education’, ‘school 2.0’, 
‘e-learning’ and the like. This book is not a rehash of the familiar transforma- 
tory claims that recur within discussions of technology use in education. This is 
not a book that purports to tell you what might happen with digital technologies, 
or evokes a sense of high-tech wonder and anticipation that many educational 
technologists appear to revel in. Instead, this is a book that is deliberately distrust- 
ful of the ongoing digitization of education provision and practice. Although ex- 
pressed rarely within academic writing on education and technology, this distrust 
is well founded. Digital technologies have long promised much in the way of 
changing education along more democratic, more equitable and fairer lines, but 
have usually delivered far less. Indeed, it could be argued that digital technologies 
have served primarily to increase socially inequitable and exclusive trends within 
education. Over the past 30 years, technology-based education provision appears 
to have been reshaped along ever more individualistic and market-driven lines, 
working primarily to satisfy the demands of contemporary capitalism. This book 
therefore concerns itself with addressing the digital degradation of education in 
close detail, and then considering what — if anything — can be done to counter it. 
In this sense, the next eight chapters are an expression of my continu- 
ing unease with academic, political and professional discussions of ‘educational 
technology’ — not least the gulf that persists between the rhetoric of how digital 
technologies could be used in education and the realities of how digital technolo- 
gies are actually used in education. In almost all of my own educational expe- 
riences of digital technology, the promises of what ‘should’ be happening have 

=== PAGE 10 ===
viii 
Preface 
far outstripped the realities of what eventually has taken place. This disjuncture 
certainly characterized my schoolboy experiences of microcomputers during the 
1980s. This is still my experience of working as a university academic and tutor 
30 years on. Perhaps the most disconcerting aspect of my perennial ‘digital dis- 
appointment’ is the absolute certainty of enthusiasts and experts when ‘talking 
up’ the educational use of the very same technologies. Of course, some of these 
people are little more than ‘hucksters’ keen to turn a profit from the educational 
technology marketplace. 
Yet educational technology is not solely the domain of 
sharp-suited, silver-tongued salespeople chasing a quick buck. Many enthusiastic 
proponents of the apparent benefits of educational technologies are amongst the 
most astute, well-intentioned, right-minded and clear-thinking people one could 
meet. There is certainly more to the ‘hyping’ of educational technology than 
either plain ignorance or simple profiteering. 
So why do so many intelligent and well-meaning people appear to suspend 
their disbelief when it comes to digital technology and education? Is educational 
technology really a site of mass ‘computer delusion’ as Todd Oppenheimer once 
put it — a ‘consensual hallucination’ on the part of techno-romantic educational- 
ists? Is educational technology a bold but ultimately doomed attempt by those 
who are brave enough to ‘dare to dream’ of a better educational future? In my 
mind, it is all too easy for the critical onlooker to excuse the field of educational 
technology in these forgiving terms. For sure, some people in educational tech- 
nology are driven by a blinkered passion for all things technological. Some people 
do see themselves as genuinely attempting to re-engineer forms of ‘better’ edu- 
cation. Yet excusing the constant failed state of educational technology as due 
simply to near misses and misguided romanticism is to overlook the wider societal 
significance of digital education. From a more sceptical perspective it could be 
argued that educational technology has never been intended to make a substantial 
difference to the fairness of education. 
As such the past 30 years have not seen any 
particular ‘failure’ of educational technology per se. Instead, educational technol- 
ogy needs to be understood as a profoundly political affair — a site of constant 
conflict and struggle between different interests and groups. In this sense, the edu- 
cational use of digital technology has no one ‘true’ meaning or inherent ‘potential’ 
that some people are more able to see than others. Instead, the educational use of 
digital technology needs to be seen as an ideologically driven concern. 
These arguments are all unpacked and expanded upon in the eight chapters 
of this book. As such, the book draws together a number of themes that have 
‘bubbled under’ much of my previous writing on education, technology and so- 
ciety, yet have never been addressed to my complete satisfaction. This book was 
prompted by a nagging feeling that my writing had never fully ‘nailed’ the ideo- 
logical nature of educational technology — despite long recognising that issues of 
ideology and politics lie at the heart of making sense of the topic. I hope that the 
book offers a more rounded account of these concerns and their consequences. It 
would be heartening to think that these arguments might go some way towards 

=== PAGE 11 ===
Preface 
ix 
challenging and changing popular perceptions of educational technology as a 
largely value-free, benign area of contemporary education. If not, then I hope 
that the book at least reinforces the message that educational technology might 
be many things, but it is certainly not above the cut and thrust of contemporary 
capitalism. 
_ Before these ideas are pursued in earnest, it is perhaps helpful to justify the 
premise of ‘Distrusting Educational Technology’. This somewhat provocative 
title was chosen to convey a number of key convictions that run throughout the 
book. First is the contention that educational technology is not value-free but 
value-laden, and therefore something that can be trusted and distrusted, agreed 
and disagreed with. Second is the belief that the nature and form of educational 
technology are not predetermined and inevitable but negotiable. In a similar 
spirit, the specific notion of ‘distrusting’ was inspired by the title of a collection of 
William Gibson’s writing — Distrust That Particular Flavor. This, it was suggested 
to me recently, is a fitting description of my own stance towards education and 
technology. Although my personal prejudices about science fiction readers leave 
me wary of science fiction writing in any form, the more that I reflected on the 
notion of ‘distrusting that particular flavour’ then the more that Gibson’s sentiment 
seemed appropriate for my own writing. Thus in this spirit of a discerning (rather 
than indiscriminate) distrust, I would like to reassure the reader that this is not a 
wholly anti-technology book per se, but rather an attempt to construct a nuanced 
and helpful set of arguments concerning the current nature and form of digital 
technology use in education. While making a passionate case for the merits of 
taking a deliberately pessimistic approach, this remains a book that is concerned 
ultimately with finding better ways of using digital technology in education. So 
regardless of whether you agree with its arguments, please take this book in the 
spirit in which it was written —as a set of arguments that are constructively (rather 
than destructively) against educational technology. 

=== PAGE 12 ===
[) 
| 
Vie be? citron’ 
- 
Pri Sein eral ewe ema drama 
: 
Gallatin 
— —earut/hvat Leragtqaitihen ssid Gimianetneees teres sax cau 
~ [imag ve 
thee ieee Ga ds! otal gure ee 
ee 
: 
fravticovs = tu Grn rata et bolt iAP Raa stipe Revo: 
inn Be Spreriinndeddarcien ben enneeeedl. oe intel 
: 
Tel 9 
ced Lei ar ney 
le cone! Acop SO 
“Se we of Hi 
eA Shawl 
eY keged gree quake sada 
7 
ee ee se eo ee 
ee 
7 
i 
ee 
eC a ee 
7 
Sh) @ Oefrtles eat “an ceri nite Mind tares Dero 
_ 
ee a ee eee Se 
ear 
ohn 
Gy 
feo 
eter sere 
OD ul cul) attri ere 
77 
» yaaa pieaiavendhanetsareeaanaee 
Qe sae GqimSe 
ow TLTied > — nylon ean 
Cee 
; 
MSA t=90) dae re 
: 
ee 
ee ee 
ot! Biya 
mplasat Captor 
ap 
ier: each ciliate yus Sear 
nea Seer 
> 
: 
eS coxa 
rm naLvi giant shim Bacipritgt 
: 
ine 
A 
One 
nr Kine somydadty nlite 
= 
ie ee RE eee 
Pry 
ao 
tans Maree 
gn «mt cea nl 

=== PAGE 13 ===
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS 
This book was researched and planned largely in the UK, and then written 
largely in Australia. As such I would like to thank academic colleagues from 
both these countries for their advice and comments on my work and writing. 
At 
Monash University I would like to thank Scott Bulfin for his recommendations 
of further reading and various critiques of early arguments and ideas. I would also 
like to thank Nicola Johnson and Michael Henderson for their enthusiasm in 
getting me over to Australia in the first place, and Ilana Synder for her suggestion 
of ‘distrust’ as the overall ‘flavour’ that runs throughout this book. I would also 
like to thank a number of colleagues at the Institute of Education—University of 
London who also helped shape and sharpen my thinking on these issues. These 
include Martin Oliver, Carey Jewitt, John Potter, Andrew Burn, Magda Kolo- 
kitha, Ambrose Neville, Carlo Perrotta, Brock Craft, Richard Noss and Diana 
Laurillard. 
Aside from colleagues in Melbourne and London, there are a number of 
other people who have played important roles in developing my reading, think- 
ing and writing. Over the past 20 years I have benefitted immensely from talk- 
ing with others on the subject — not least Keri Facer, Sonia Livingstone, David 
Buckingham and Charles Crook. Finally on a more practical note, I am always 
grateful for the editorial work that goes into the publishing process. So I would 
like to thank the New York production and editorial team at Routledge — 
notably Alex Masulis and Madeleine Hamlin. I would also like to thank Juliet 
Sheath at Full Focus Photography, London, for her work on the front cover 
image. 
Of course, all these acknowledgements are accompanied by the usual cave- 
ats and get-out clauses. In particular, I would like to remind readers that while 

=== PAGE 14 ===
xii 
Acknowledgements 
this book draws on the work, ideas and arguments of many others, ultimately 
I remain responsible for writing it. All errors, inconsistencies or inaccuracies 
are mine. 
Neil Selwyn 
Melbourne — June 2013 

=== PAGE 15 ===
1 
WHY DISTRUST 
EDUCATIONAL TECHNOLOGY? 
Introduction 
In comparison to other major educational problems of our times, the need to ask 
critical questions of digital technology in education is not immediately appar- 
ent. It is perhaps unsurprising that little serious attention has been paid to digital 
technology within recent critiques of contemporary education. Most critically 
minded authors understandably concern themselves with interrogating and ex- 
amining the more obvious educational controversies and conflicts of curricular 
reform, social reproduction, marketization, identity politics, inclusion, the uni- 
versal right to schooling and so on. In contrast, many people presume digital 
technology to be one of the least problematic elements of contemporary educa- 
tion provision and practice. Indeed, digital technologies of all shapes and sizes are 
now woven deeply into the everyday fabric of education — from ‘virtual learn- 
ing environments’ and interactive whiteboards to Google searches and Wikipedia 
entries. Tools and applications such as these represent some of the most familiar 
cultural resources and symbols within contemporary educational settings and, at 
first glance, do not appear to be of particular cause for concern. If anything, the 
use of digital technology has now become a rather unremarkable aspect of educa- 
tion provision and practice. 
Yet the use of digital technology in education should now be seen as a sig- 
nificant issue for everyone with a stake in education. The day-to-day lives of 
learners and educators are saturated with digital technology use — both in terms 
of personal uses of digital devices and the more hidden uses of technological tools 
and systems by educational institutions. Digital technology continues to be an 
important educational priority for governments, politicians and policymakers — 
especially in terms of national efforts to engineer new and improved education 

=== PAGE 16 ===
2 Why Distrust Educational Technology? 
systems with the capability to “‘out-educate and out-hustle the rest of the world” 
(Obama 2011).The use of digital technology in education is certainly of signifi- 
cance to commercial actors involved in the selling of technology to educational 
consumers — a global marketplace that is estimated conservatively to be worth in 
excess of $5 trillion per annum. Obscured by these interests perhaps, but no less 
significant, educational technology is also a growing concern for parents, journa- 
lists, employers and most other education ‘stakeholders’. 
In short, digital technology should be seen as an integral part of the educa- 
tional landscape, and as something that is shaped by the (in)actions of a wide 
range of different actors and interests. Indeed, as all but the most ardent tech- 
nological determinist would acknowledge, digital technology is not something 
that simply comes down to us from ‘on high’ — fully formed and ready to use. 
Instead, any instance of digital technology use in education is shaped by a range 
of social interests — from designers and developers, financiers and marketers to 
technology-using educators and the educational institutions they work within 
(see Bromley 1997; Oliver 2011). While all acting upon different motivations 
and intentions, these groups share a common interest in stimulating and sup- 
porting the increased acceptance and use of digital technology in education. It 
is therefore understandable that educational technology tends to be promoted 
_ and publicized by actors from all sides of the ‘education community’ as a natural, 
necessary and largely neutral element of contemporary education. 
An orthodoxy 
appears to have developed in most parts of the world that digital technologies are 
an integral and inevitable feature of ‘modern’ forms of education, and therefore 
require little or no discussion. Certainly as far as many academic commentators 
are concerned, the only questions that need to be asked today of educational 
technology are technical and procedural in nature. How might we better ‘harness’ 
the educational potential of technology? How might technology use be more 
‘effective’? What changes do new technologies demand of existing educational 
ideas and understandings? 
Questions such as these are all well and good, yet offer a highly partial pic- 
ture of education and technology when addressed in isolation. In contrast, this 
book seeks to explore a set of more awkward and difficult questions. So while 
most people tend to think of technology as a necessary and even neutral feature 
of education, this book starts from the premise that educational technology is 
certainly not uncontested terrain. Approached in these terms, educational tech- 
nology is not a straightforward, value-free process involving an individual using 
a piece of technology in order to learn something. Instead, all of the actors out- 
lined so far in this chapter should be seen as having good reason to ensure that 
their interests and values are supported and advanced through the use of digital 
technology in education. While undoubtedly of great potential benefit, it is clear 
that educational technology is a value-laden site of profound struggle that some 
people benefit more from than others — most notably in terms of power and 
profit. 

=== PAGE 17 ===
Why Distrust Educational Technology? 
3 
Thus despite all the prevailing talk of enhanced equality and democracy, it 
must be remembered that the application of digital technology in educational set- 
tings is almost always an unequal affair. To put it in crude terms, educational tech- 
nology could be observed to involve a hierarchy of actors and interests ranging 
from those who generally ‘do’ educational technology through to those who gen- 
erally have educational technology ‘done’ to them. In other words, it is important 
to acknowledge the differences that persist throughout educational technology 
between those who produce and those who consume, those who are empowered 
and those who are exploited. These are all ‘outcomes’ that are rarely acknowl- 
edged and written about in the academic educational technology literature. In- 
deed, part of my own long-standing concern with educational technology — and 
certainly a motivation for writing this book ~ lies with the apparently uncontro- 
versial, unproblematic and apolitical manner in which educational technology 
tends to be discussed by otherwise highly critical commentators. 
Why is it that so 
many critically minded academic writers and researchers have an apparent ‘blind 
spot’ for the politics of educational technology? More importantly, what can be 
done to politicize the field of educational technology and establish it as an area of 
serious academic debate and discussion? It is these issues that this book concerns 
itself with. This is what is meant 
by “distrusting educational technology’. 
One of the key prompts to write this book, therefore, is the fact that those 
who tend to be most disadvantaged by educational technology are usually those 
who think least critically about it. These people are usually described in pejorative 
terms within technology discussions as ‘end users’, despite encompassing a large 
majority of the population (and certainly a large number of readers of this book). 
In this sense, the reluctance of a majority of people to critique their relationships 
with educational technology is certainly not confined to education. Langdon 
Winner (2004) described a phenomenon of ‘technological somnambulism’ that 
seems to pervade Western society — that is, the tendency for a majority of people 
to sleepwalk through their mediations with technology. As Matthewman (2011, 
p. 173) writes, contemporary society suffers from a ‘banal’ tendency to overlook 
the role of digital technology in everyday life: 
We do not notice the obvious. Ubiquity creates invisibility. McLuhan fa- 
mously compared us to fish that fail to see our water. Under such circum- 
stances, as Heidegger said, we are only likely to notice our technologies 
when they stop working as anticipated. 
Even though people may now consider themselves to be far more technologi- 
cally sophisticated than might have been the case in the times of Heidegger or 
McLuhan, there has been little recent indication that the tendency to look past 
‘the digital’ is diminishing. Given the recent mass fetishization of all things Apple, 
coupled with the apparent compulsion for people to spend every waking hour 
of their lives tweeting, posting and ‘liking’, it would seem that very few of us are 

=== PAGE 18 ===
4 Why Distrust Educational Technology? 
overly concerned with developing critical knowledge of how we interact with 
digital technology. Winner (2004) sees this disinterest in the politics of technology 
as stemming from a number of factors. First is the ever-increasing separation be- 
tween the minority who design, develop, make and sell ‘new’ technology and the 
mass of us who end up merely purchasing and using it. Second is a long-standing 
tendency within Western thought to view digital technologies as tools that largely 
are separate from the human condition and can therefore be used and then dis- 
carded without any long-term personal implications. A third — and perhaps most 
significant — reason relates to the ways in which digital technologies are believed 
commonly to create ‘new’ spaces and places in which people can interact and 
operate separately from their nontechnologically mediated ‘offline’ existences. As 
such, much of what goes on ‘through’ digital technology use is often somehow 
perceived as being situated away from the minutiae and messiness of the ‘real’ 
world. Given this dissonance, it is perhaps understandable that the majority of 
people tend to be concerned with the personally pleasurable aspects of their tech- 
nology use, rather than fretting over how these technologies might be entwined 
with the wider economic, political, social and cultural conditions of everyday life. 
This sense of ‘sleepwalking’ is certainly reflected in the apolitical manner in 
which educational technology has been understood and discussed by academic 
commentators over the past 30 years or so. Even within the specialized academic 
fields of ‘technology-enhanced learning’ and ‘educational technology’ those writ- 
ers and researchers who devote much of their time engaging with the topic tend 
to do so in constrained ways. From the outset, then, it is my intention that this 
will not be a book that will be similarly compromised and curtailed. Instead, 
this book will examine educational technology in a profoundly political light — 
approaching digital technology as part of the complex ways that social, economic 
and political tensions are ‘mediated’ in educational settings. 
As such, this is a book 
that aims to unpack the issues, arguments and assumptions that underpin four 
recent forms of digital technology use in education that otherwise tend to be 
considered as largely benign and wholly beneficial: virtual, open, games and social 
technologies. In particular the book seeks to problematize these technological 
forms in order to uncover their latent ideological content. 
A number of ques- 
tions are therefore pursued with regard to examining the ideological nature of 
these dominant aspects of the current educational technology orthodoxy. Just why 
have these forms of technology use been selected and promoted in the ways that 
they are? Whose technologies are these? Who selected them? Why are they being 
organized and provided in the ways that they are? What interests are benefiting 
from this use? What linkages are there between these forms of educational tech- 
nology and wider societal (re)arrangements and organization? 
On one hand, then, this book seeks to problematize what is being presented 
to us as ‘educational technology’ and ask whether there might be alternate ways 
of making fairer use of digital technologies in education. As Sonia Livingstone 
reasons, there are perhaps only three lines of questioning worth pursuing when 

=== PAGE 19 ===
Why Distrust Educational Technology? 
5 
considering digital technology use in this manner — that is, “what’s really going 
on, how can this be explained, and how could things be otherwise?” (Livingstone 
2012, p. 19). These questions certainly underpin much of this book’s analysis. 
Yet the overriding concern in doing so is not to attempt valiantly to ‘improve’ 
educational technology per se. Instead, this book is concerned first and foremost 
with unpacking and problematizing the inherently political nature of what is seen 
usually as a profoundly apolitical aspect of contemporary education provision and 
practice. In this way, it should be possible to develop more concrete and complete 
understandings of the linkages between political and economic power and the 
forms of technology-based education that are being experienced by ‘end users’ 
around the world. 
What We (don’t) Talk About When We Talk 
About ‘Educational Technology’ 
Before all these grand ambitions can be realized, it is perhaps helpful to first con- 
sider some fundamental matters of definition. In particular, what are we referring 
to when we talk about ‘educational technology’? Moreover, why should it be 
approached in problematic terms? In addressing these basic questions, it is worth 
reminding ourselves that the development of increasingly ‘powerful’ digital tech- 
nologies has undoubtedly been one of the defining features of the past 30 years. 
Indeed, the scale and pace of recent digital innovation — in particular the growth 
of computing, the internet and mobile telephony — have prompted many com- 
mentators to position digital technology as a key driver of societal development 
around the world (Castells 2006). One of the striking characteristics of many 
recent accounts and analyses has been the transformative (and often optimistic) 
ways in which the changes associated with digital technology are imagined. Many 
popular and academic perceptions of digital technology appear, for example, to be 
animated by common discourses of progress and the allure of ‘the new’, coupled 
with a belief that our current digitally inflected era represents a “‘pervasive sense 
of leaving the past behind” (Murdock 2004, p. 20). In particular, many discussions 
are informed by a belief that digital technologies herald distinctively new and 
improved social arrangements in comparison to preceding ‘predigital’ times. This 
sense of improved change has been described as a “digital remediation’ of everyday 
life and social processes (see Bolter & Grusin 1999), where digital technologies 
are reconfiguring social processes and practices for the better. This is not to say 
that ‘new’ digital forms are believed to be usurping all social practices and pro- 
cesses that have gone before, but rather that digitally based activities are able to 
borrow from, refashion and often surpass their earlier predigital equivalents. For 
many commentators, therefore, the ready answer to alleviating contemporary so- 
cial problems is now assumed to involve some form of digital technology. As Steve 
Woolgar (2002, p. 3) reflects, “The implication 1s that something new, different, 
and (usually) better is happening”. 

=== PAGE 20 ===
6 Why Distrust Educational Technology? 
Given these general trends, it is not surprising that the past 30 years have seen 
increasing enthusiasms for computerized, online and increasingly mobile forms 
of teaching and learning. Given the apparent transformatory power of contempo- 
rary digital technologies, it is understandable that these technologies are now seen 
by most commentators as being an essential and largely unquestionable element 
of contemporary educational arrangements. Indeed, the controversies that raged 
throughout the 1980s and 1990s over whether learning about digital technol- 
ogy should be a core component of education (the so-called issue of “computer 
literacy’) have long since been resolved. Now there is widespread acceptance that 
digital technologies should play an integral role in all aspects of learning through- 
out the life course. Thus widespread support now exists for the integration of 
computers into school, college and university contexts, as well as the online de- 
livery of opportunities for study and training. There is also much enthusiasm for 
the digitally supported ‘informal’ modes of learning that are stimulated by general 
interests, pursuits and hobbies outside of the formal curriculum. In short, digital 
technology is now seen as an utterly integral but wholly unremarkable compo- 
nent of educational conditions and arrangements around the world. 
At this point, it is important to note that ‘educational technology’ is not a 
single, homogenous entity. Instead, ‘educational technology’ is deceptively neat 
shorthand for a diverse array of socio-technical devices, activities and practices. 
Above and beyond the multitude of technological devices and artefacts them- 
selves, ‘educational technology’ refers to a wide-ranging field of activities and 
practices — that is, what is done with these technologies in the name of education. 
Perhaps less obviously, ‘educational technology’ also refers to a commercial field of 
technology development, production and marketing, as well as a thriving field of 
academic study and scholarship. While all of these areas of activity are concerned 
with the use of technology in educational settings, they are so in very different 
ways, often for very different reasons. As such, ‘educational technology’ needs to 
be understood as a knot of social, political, economic and cultural agendas that is 
riddled with complications, contradictions and conflicts. It therefore makes little 
sense to talk of “educational technology’ as a neat single entity, just as it makes 
little sense to talk of ‘society’ in singular, monolithic terms. One of the first tasks in 
this book’s development ofa distrust of educational technology is to establish a suf- 
ficiently nuanced understanding of what ‘educational technology’ is in all its forms. 
Taking this multifaceted approach certainly runs counter to the ways in which 
educational technology tends to be discussed in popular, political and academic 
circles. Despite its obvious complexity, educational technology tends to be per- 
ceived in alarmingly one-dimensional terms. This is the case even with the con- 
tinually renewed range of products and devices that constitute the material face of 
educational technology. In fact, most discussions of ‘educational technology’ focus 
only on the most popular and prominent ‘classroom’ forms of digital technology. 
Instead, it is important to recognise from the outset that educational uses of digital 

=== PAGE 21 ===
Why Distrust Educational Technology? 
7 
technology range from the personal use of internet-connected portable devices 
such as tablet computers and ‘smartphones’ to multimedia immersive simulation 
environments for the military and medical professions. It is also important to 
note that educational applications of digital technology are not confined only to 
schools and universities. These technological devices are used throughout edu- 
cational systems to support a diversity of forms of educational provision, from 
kindergartens to work-based training and community settings. 
We therefore need 
to remain mindful of this diversity throughout our subsequent discussions. 
It is also worth moving beyond the limited, one-dimensional manner in which 
educational technology outcomes tend to be understood and portrayed. Indeed, 
in most popular, political and academic discussions, digital technologies tend to 
be associated with similar sets of potentially far-reaching shifts either in terms 
of individual learning and/or the organization and governance of educational 
provision. For instance, most digital technologies over the past 30 years have been 
accompanied by promises of widened participation in education, increased moti- 
vation and engagement, better levels of ‘attainment’, enhanced convenience of use 
and more ‘efficient’ and ‘effective’ provision of educational opportunities. Indeed, 
the field of education and technology is beset by exaggerated expectations over 
the capacity of the latest ‘new’ technology to change education for the better, 
regardless of context or circumstance. Typical of this thinking, for example, was 
Rupert Murdoch’ assertion that current forms of internet technology offer the 
potential to “ensure the poor child in Manila has the same chance as the rich 
child in Manhattan 
. 
. 
. the key to our future is to unlock this potential” (cited in 
Willsher 2011, n.p.). 
High-profile public proclamations of this sort typify the general belief amongst 
many powerful interests that digital technologies have the potential to enable 
fundamental educational change and renewal. One prominent discourse here is 
the notion of digital technology sustaining a genuinely democratic rearrange- 
ment of educational opportunity — in John Daniel’s (2009, p. 62) words, heralding 
“a tectonic shift that will bring the benefits of learning and knowledge to mil- 
lions”. The notion of educational technology as a democratizing phenomenon is 
evident in numerous celebrations of the ability of digital tools and applications to 
allow educators and educational institutions to operate in ‘borderless’ and ‘edge- 
less’ ways, and for individuals to enjoy unprecedented levels of meritocratic edu- 
cational opportunity. From an epistemological perspective, digital technologies 
continue to be associated with the ‘de-territorialisation’ and ‘de-referentialization’ 
of knowledge, where data, information and knowledge travel freely around the 
world and are unencumbered by boundaries. For some critical educators, then, 
digital technologies are seen as opening up possibilities for the development of 
cosmopolitan and communitarian forms of education, “powerfully contribut[ing] 
to the worldwide democratization, civic engagement and action-orientated so- 
cial responsibility” of educators and educational institutions (Benson & Harkavy 

=== PAGE 22 ===
8 Why Distrust Educational Technology? 
2002, p. 169). There are many people who — for a variety of reasons — believe 
passionately along these lines that digital technology is an inherently “good thing’ 
for education. 
This is not to say that the use of digital technology in education has been 
free from any dissent at all. Indeed, the past 30 years have seen a small but steady 
succession of commentators developing counterarguments to these celebratory 
discourses — asserting in essence that digital technologies are a generally ‘bad 
thing’ for education. Here educational technology has tended to be associated 
with a set of universalized problems — from increased physiological and neu- 
rological impairments and risks to diminished learning and general disengage- 
ment from education. Authors such as Clifford Stoll gained notoriety during 
the 1980s with books such as High Tech Heretic and Silicon Snake Oil, pointing 
out the excesses of the procomputer lobby in education. More recently, Mark 
Bauerlein in The Dumbest Generation offered a similarly dismissive analysis of the 
funding being directed towards educational technology, questioning whether it 
was helping people learn any better than they would without. Indeed, peren- 
nial concerns have been raised over the intellectual ‘dumbing-down’ associated 
with students’ and teachers’ use of digital technologies to access information 
and knowledge (Donnelly 2012). Similarly, biologists and psychologists have 
_ pointed towards technology-related declines in children’s cognitive skills and 
mental performance, as well as the unbalancing of hormonal levels (Sigman 
2009; Greenfield 2009). Aside from these supposed detrimental effects on intel- 
lect, cognition and ‘traditional’ skills and literacies, fears have long been raised 
that digital technologies may be contributing to.an increased disaffection and 
disrespect amongst students for schools and classroom-based learning (Parsons & 
Taylor 2011). 
Another small set of authors has sustained a strain of technology critique 
within the social sciences, philosophy and humanities that presents straightfor- 
ward and dystopian visions of contemporary technology-based education. As 
Cooper (2002, p. 129) reasons, these are critics who “can do little else than simply 
say ‘no’ to technology”. Perhaps the most well-known critique ‘against’ educa- 
tional technology in these terms was Todd Oppenheimer’s treatise The Flickering 
Mind, with its unequivocal subtitle of “The False Promise of Technology in the 
Classroom and How Learning Can Be Saved”. Here Oppenheimer focused on 
what he describes as the ineffectual use of technology in formal education set- 
tings characterized by commercially driven ‘False Promises’ and practically related 
‘Hidden Troubles’. Similarly, Tara Brabazon’s Digital Hemlock and The University of 
Google both pointed to the (over)use of digital technology in education as ‘white 
bread for the mind’. While far less prominent than the proponents of educational 
technology, commentators such as these nevertheless could be said to constitute 
a vocal ‘counterorthodoxy of pessimism’ amongst some public figures and aca- 
demics where, as William Wresch (2004, p. 71) puts it, “nothing good can be said 
about information technology”. 

=== PAGE 23 ===
Why Distrust Educational Technology? 
9 
Approaching Educational Technology in Critical 
Rather Than Celebratory Terms 
This tendency for the majority of people to unthinkingly assume educational 
technology to be inherently beneficial and for a few others to oppose it in gener- 
ally unconvincing and alarmist terms has limited the quality of debate and scru- 
tiny in the area over the past 30 years or so. Polarized debates over the absolute 
‘rights’ and ‘wrongs’ of educational technology have certainly marginalized more 
nuanced concerns over the politics of digital technology use in education. Clearly, 
given the increasing prominence, diversity and complexity of ‘educational tech- 
nology’, it is time to move beyond such extreme received wisdoms. Instead, it 
surely makes better sense to set about developing an appropriately critical approach 
to making sense of the use of digital technology in education. A ready starting 
point for doing so can be found in Chris Bigum and Jane Kenway’s critique 
nearly 20 years ago of the tendency of educational technology to be discussed 
mainly in terms of ‘boosterist’ claims of efficieucies of provision, choice and diver- 
sity, enablers and drivers, speed and convenience. As Bigum and Kenway (1998, 
p. 378) contended, these were proponents of educational technology 
characterized by an unswerving faith in the technology’s capacity to improve 
education and most other things in society, often coupled with a sense of 
inevitability concerning the growth and use of computer technology. They 
have few doubts about the educational merits of their vision for change. 
Conversely, many of the usual arguments against educational technology can 
be described as ‘doomster’ discourses. As Bigum and Kenway observe, these are 
visions that 
see much damage to society and education arising from the uncritical ac- 
ceptance of new media forms . 
. 
. nostalgic for the period when these tech- 
nologies did not exist or for the practices and institutions that are being 
replaced by new technologies. 
(ibid., p. 386) 
While the polarized nature of societal views of education and digital tech- 
nology in excessively optimistic or excessively pessimistic terms is wholly un- 
derstandable, they run counter to many of the recent realities of educational 
technology use. Instead, much of the use of digital technology in education is 
far ‘messier’ than the rhetoric of absolute change (for better or for worse) might 
suggest. Indeed, one of the common outcomes of digital technology use in educa- 
tion often appears to be that of largely unaltered “business as usual’. As all but the 
most blinkered educational technology commentators would concede, many of 
the fundamental elements of ‘traditional’ learning and teaching have been neither 

=== PAGE 24 ===
10 Why Distrust Educational Technology? 
transformed nor ruined by the waves of digital technologies that have been in- 
troduced inside and outside of classrooms over the past few decades. Despite 
repeated predictions of inevitable changes and impending transformations, digital 
technologies are used inconsistently in educational settings, usually with little 
large-scale conclusive ‘effect’. Put bluntly, then, any stridently optimistic descrip- 
tion of technology-induced educational change should be seen more as a matter 
of faith than as a matter of fact. 
This matter of people’s strident faith or belief in the power of digital techno- 
logy to effect change is an important one, and shall be revisited throughout this 
book. As should already be evident, the use of digital technology in education is 
a matter for many people of intense conviction and passion. While the imperative 
to make ‘best’ use of digital technologies in education may appear irrefutable, it is 
important to remain mindful of the symbolic role that technology often plays in 
discussions and debates over societal change and improvement. In this sense, many 
of the promises, claims and justifications outlined so far in this chapter are perhaps 
more accurately seen as inspirational and exhortative rather than actual accounts 
of education and digital technologies. 
The field of educational technology could 
therefore be said to be imbued with a distinct sense of ‘truthiness’ — that is, “the 
quality of preferring concepts or facts one wishes to be true, rather than concepts 
_or facts known to be true” (Spring 2012, p. 30). In this sense, educational techno- 
logy is as much a focus for wish fulfilment as it is a focus for accurate forecasting 
and reasoned analysis. 
This notion of the use of digital technology in’ education being a matter of 
faith as well as fact suggests that educational technology might be best understood 
as akin to many other faith systems — that is, a “system of radical optimism” that 
persists despite the lack of immediate experience or evidence (Inge 1912/2003, 
p. xiii). Of course, as with any faith system, within this system of technological 
optimism and hope, a variety of positions can be taken. For example, Duncan- 
Andrade (2009) distinguishes between what he terms ‘hokey hope’, which reflects 
a naive view that somehow things will get better, despite the lack of evidence to 
warrant this view, and ‘mythical hope’, which is based around a “profoundly ahis- 
torical and depoliticized denial of suffering that is rooted in celebrating individual 
exceptions” (Duncan-Andrade 2009, p. 184). Finally, there is the state of ‘hope de- 
ferred’, which sees the current economic, political or society ‘system’ as blocking 
the otherwise inevitable transformation. Educational technology can certainly be 
said to contain all these variations of hope, despite the lack of compelling tangible 
signs of their realization. Indeed, educational technology could be seen as a field 
that requires its participants to collectively sustain a blind, unwavering belief that 
the ‘project’ will be seen through to an ultimately successful conclusion. 
These latter descriptions raise the point that ‘educational technology’ needs 
to be understood both as process and as discourse — a distinction that reiterates the 
argument that relatively little of what is presented under the label of ‘educational 
technology’ is a straightforward matter of fact rather than a more complex matter 

=== PAGE 25 ===
Why Distrust Educational Technology? 
11 
of hope and belief. Above all, then, it is important to acknowledge that notions 
such as ‘technology-enhanced learning’, ‘learning technology’ and ‘e-learning’ are 
largely sets of value preferences — that is, social imaginaries and ideological forma- 
tions that present common (and often persuasive) understandings of how things 
‘should be’ and ‘will be’. Thus, we would do well as this book progresses to resist 
the temptation to take every ‘educational technology’ concept and explanation 
at face value. As Nicholas Garnham concludes, accepting unquestioningly big 
explanatory notions of digital technology and society does not “serve as a use- 
ful starting point” for any thorough social science analysis. Rather, the uncriti- 
cal use of concepts such as these “merely and dangerously distracts — as is often 
intended — from the real issues” (Garnham 2000, p. 126). It therefore makes good 
sense at this stage of our analysis to treat the notion of ‘educational technology’ as 
‘problematic’ — that is, as useful means of highlighting clusters of issues for inves- 
tigation and consideration rather than a foolproof blueprint for the future of the 
world (Lyon 1988). In this spirit, a critical approach towards educational technol- 
ogy would seem not only sensible but aiso essential. 
Assuming a Critical Stance Towards Educational Technology 
As has been implied already, such is its apparent ubiquity throughout contempo- 
rary society that it is rare for digital technology to be subjected to a full, sustained 
critique. Most of the criticism that has been levelled towards digital technology 
in recent times has tended to be either ‘medicalized’ or ‘moralized’ (Lovink 2011, 
p. 9) — that is, questioning the psychological aspects of technology engagement, 
or else framing it in terms of what is considered to be morally acceptable in soci- 
ety. As Lovink writes, popular concerns and unease about digital technology are 
often expressed in terms of cognitive and neurological development, generational 
and age differences or the causation of violence and addictive behaviours. These 
concerns tend to cumulate in a psychopathologizing and individualizing of the 
‘problem’ of technology use. Thus many recent popular critiques of technology 
appear uncertain where to attribute blame — often settling erroneously on blam- 
ing the individual. As Lovink (2011, p. 25) concludes, “In the information age 
we blame ourselves without knowing why we are at fault”. It is notable that this 
reversion to individual blame does little to address the inherently social nature of 
digital technologies, and the shared political, economic, cultural and historical na- 
ture of the digital artefacts, processes and practices that we are seeking to critique. 
This paucity of critique has certainly limited the academic study of educa- 
tion and technology, where little criticism of any sort tends to come from aca- 
demic writers and researchers. Even in the 2010s, authors advancing a critical 
or negative analysis are likely to be ignored politely, or else shouted down as 
‘Luddites’, ‘technophobes’ or ‘naysayers’. Indeed, the academic study of educa- 
tional technology is perhaps best understood as an essentially ‘positive project’. 
Most people working in this area are driven by an underlying belief that digital 

=== PAGE 26 ===
12 Why Distrust Educational Technology? 
technologies are — in some way — capable of improving education. This mind- 
set is evident, for example, in the tendency throughout the 2000s to refer to 
‘technology-enhanced learning’ or before this, during the 1980s and 1990s, to 
‘computer-assisted learning’ — descriptions that leave little doubt over the inher- 
ent connection between digital technology and the improvement of learning and 
teaching. As such, the de facto role of the academic educational technologist is 
understood to be one of finding ways to make these technology-based improve- 
ments happen and — to coin a phrase often used in the field — to ‘harness the 
power of technology’. Of course, this positive approach reflects the desire amongst 
most educational technologists to make education (and, it follows, ‘the world’) a 
better place. Nevertheless, it could be argued that this inherent positivity has long 
been an all-encompassing — if not hegemonic — feature of educational technology 
thinking and writing that limits the validity and credibility of the field as a site 
of serious academic endeavour. In this sense, the apparently calm and consensual 
tone of most educational technology debates and discussions belies an implicit 
‘with-us-or-against-us’ attitude. In short, most people working in the field are so 
convinced of the benefits of digital technology in education that they are unwill- 
ing to think otherwise. 
Educational technology has therefore become a curiously closed field of 
study — populated by people who consider themselves to be in the somehow 
more informed position of properly understanding the educational potential of 
digital technology. This can sometimes lead writers and researchers to adopt an 
intellectual stance that is evangelical — if not righteous — in its advocacy of this 
‘truth’. As its heart, then, educational technology displays many of the features of 
what Kling and Iocono (1988) termed a ‘computerization movement’ — that is, an 
interest-driven field of practice whose advocates focus on digital technologies as 
instruments capable of bringing about some sort of new social order. Of course, 
most academic disciplines and fields have dominant traditions and shared theo- 
retical assumptions. 
Yet unlike most other fields of academic study, educational 
technology appears particularly resistant to viewpoints that contradict its core 
beliefs and values — not least the orthodoxy that technology is a potential force 
for positive change. 
The present book can be considered ‘critical’ in that it offers a counterpoint to 
this orthodoxy. In this sense, taking a critical approach does not imply some rigid, 
dogmatic adherence to a particular political viewpoint or philosophical tradition. 
Instead, we are pursuing what Popkewitz (1987, p. 350) describes as ‘critical intel- 
lectual work’ — that is, attempting to move “outside the assumptions and practices 
of the existing order and struggling to make categories, assumptions and practices 
of everyday life problematic”. 
This involves not finding comfort in commonsen- 
sical assumptions and taking things for granted. Being ‘critical’ instead implies 
taking a sceptical view of the claims surrounding educational technology in terms 
of fairness and efficiency, and rejecting the notion that this is an inevitable pro- 
cess that is beyond challenge or change. This also involves problematizing and 

=== PAGE 27 ===
Why Distrust Educational Technology? 
13 
engaging in systematic doubt — what John Holloway (2002, p. 6) describes simply 
as “a refusal to accept”. This involves considering alternative explanations and 
perspectives, and maintaining a generally questioning approach to the established 
order. As Robert Cox (1981, p. 126) describes it, the critical academic therefore 
“stands apart from the prevailing order of the world and asks how that order came 
to be”. As all these descriptions suggest, this is not a glamorous, self- affirming or 
‘sexy’ approach to take — especially in comparison to the generally breathless ac- 
counts usually produced about digital media and technology. As Geert Lovink 
(2011, p. 63) acknowledges, any critical study of new technology will be gruel- 
ling and unglamorous — “we need to keep in mind that criticism is a necessary 
yet boring job; developing a compelling argument of related concepts can be 
profoundly unsexy”. 
The Need for a Technological Pessimism in Education 
These previous observations are not intended to demean or affront the majority of 
academics who choose not to approach education and technology in this manner. 
In many ways the embrace of a positive and optimistic position is a completely 
understandable stance to adopt with respect to the application of technology 
in education — fitting neatly with the ‘techno-romantic’ manner in which most 
technologies are framed within modern thought. Indeed, there is a long-standing 
intellectual tradition in Western thinking of viewing technology as the pinnacle 
of scientific accomplishment (Coyne 1999), stemming from an Enlightenment- 
informed ideal of ‘progress’. Thus, as Leo Marx (1994) has observed, the act of 
technology being ‘assigned a heroic role’ in pursuit of this ‘progress’ is certainly 
not a new one. Moreover, it could be argued that a tendency to be optimistic 
about the role of technology in modern life is itself an example of the positive 
essence that lies at the heart of nearly all Western thought. With only a few ex- 
ceptions (such as Nietzsche and Schopenhauer), it could be argued that optimism 
is an essential underlying component of Western philosophy. As Dienstag (2006, 
p. 34) observes, most Western thought is based around “the notion that there must 
be an answer to our fundamental questions, even if we have not found it yet, and 
that this answer will deliver us from suffering”. 
Set against this orthodoxy of optimism, it is perhaps to be expected that the aca- 
demic study of educational technology is driven by an almost unconscious urge to 
improve the human condition through technology. After all, this is simply how we 
are brought up to think about the role of technology in modern society. Yet while 
maybe justifiable from a philosophical point of view, the fact remains that this 
optimism and positivity have nevertheless served to limit the credibility and useful- 
ness of educational technology within the wider social sciences. Even in terms of 
its ‘parent’ field of education studies, educational technology tends to be viewed 
as something of a lesser endeavour — a peripheral distraction from the more press- 
ing ‘real’ issues of education and society. How, then, can educational technology 

=== PAGE 28 ===
14 Why Distrust Educational Technology? 
discussion and debate be reinvigorated and reorientated towards becoming a more 
realistic, rigorous and ultimately relevant academic form? It is here that a case can 
be made for the field to adopt an avowedly critical and — above all — pessimistic 
perspective. In other words, to think against educational technology. 
Given all that we know about the social complexities of technology use in 
education, it could be argued that a pessimistic stance is the most sensible, and 
possibly the most productive, perspective to take. As such, this book starts from 
the premise of simply accepting education, technology and society as it is — for 
better and (more often) for worse. It is important to note that this does not entail 
the adoption of dogmatic blanket negativity towards education and technology. 
Instead, this is to be a carefully focused and well-directed negativity and distrust. 
Holloway (2002, p. 5) writes, 
It is not because we are maladjusted that we criticise, it is not because we 
want to be difficult. It is just that the negative situation in which we exist 
leaves us no option: to live, to think, is to negate in whatever way we can 
the negativeness of our existence. 
In its purest sense, then, pessimism still allows room for an acceptance that specific 
things are getting better. However, it also acknowledges the fact that life has long 
remained the same for most people in most circumstances, and that many social 
inequalities continue to persist regardless of changes elsewhere. 
Thus at one level, 
the pessimistic observer is simply one who adopts a mindset that is willing to 
recognise — and work within — the current and historical limitations of educa- 
tional technology rather than its imagined limitless potential. As Dienstag (2006, 
p. 25) points out, 
Pessimists do not deny the existence of ‘progress’ in certain areas — they do 
not deny that technologies have improved or that the powers of science 
have increased. Instead, they ask whether these improvements are insepara- 
bly related to a greater set of costs that often go unperceived. Or they ask 
whether these changes have really resulted in a fundamental melioration of 
the human condition. 
When seen in this light, it could be reasoned that pessimism is a rewarding 
and heartening position from which to approach education and technology. As 
Dienstag (2006, p. 40) contrasts, “The pessimist expects nothing — thus he or she 
is more truly open to every possibility as it presents itself... the optimist, on the 
other hand, must suffer through a life of disappointment, where a chaotic world 
constantly disturbs the upward path he feels entitled to tread”. The pessimistic 
position certainly relieves the educational technologist from the burden of having 
to offer grand solutions to problems that can never be solved. 
As Dienstag (2006, 
p. 269) writes, the pessimistic mindset “rejects the idea that ... human existence 
[is] a question or a problem waiting to be solved. Human existence just is — it has 

=== PAGE 29 ===
Why Distrust Educational Technology? 
15 
no predicate”. In this sense, pessimism provides an ideal means of breaking free 
from the recurring cycle of ‘hype, hope and disappointment’ that has so often 
beset educational technology over the past 30 years (see Gouseti 2010). 
In these terms alone, concentrating on the negative — instead of the positive — 
aspects of educational technology should lie at the heart of any attempt to estab- 
lish a ‘better’ field of scholarship and practice. If there is anything to be learnt from 
the past 30 years of ‘computer-assisted learning’ and ‘technology-enhanced learn- 
ing’ it surely is that there is little to be gained from maintaining a Pollyannaish 
stance towards technology use in education. Instead, contemporary discussions of 
educational technology need to foreground a host of usually overlooked critical 
issues and themes. Perhaps, as implied earlier in this chapter, the overriding change 
that this entails is shifting the field away from asking ‘state-of-the-art’ questions 
about technology, and towards asking questions that can be described as being 
concerned with the ‘state-of-the-actual’. In other words, educational technology 
scholarship should look beyond questions of how technology could and should 
be used, and instead ask questions about how technology is actually being used 
in practice. 
Thus at one level, the pessimistic perspective simply draws attention to the fact 
that the use of digital technology in education is never a completely predictable 
or certain affair. Given all the obvious limitations of the realities of educational 
technology use in situ, the ‘glass-half-empty’ view is perhaps a more rational ap- 
proach to take than the ‘glass-half-full’. 
The pessimistic educational technologist is 
at least willing to accept that digital technology is not bringing about the changes 
and transformations that many people would like to believe. Similarly, the pes- 
simistic educational technologist recognises that to imagine otherwise for the fu- 
ture is to misunderstand wilfully the nature of social change. Yet to repeat a point 
made earlier, this is not to reconfigure educational technology into a defeatist 
endeavour. Instead, pessimism can provide an ideal basis from which educational 
technologists can achieve positive ends. While the field of educational techno- 
logy clearly has much to gain from taking pessimism rather than optimism as the 
starting point for its activities, this should be done as an initial step towards then 
exploring how best to work alongside (and within) the imperfections of digital 
technology and education. 
It is therefore important to note that what is being advanced here is the pur- 
poseful pursuit of pessimism. This is not what Michael Burawoy (2011) identifies 
as an ‘uncompromising pessimism’ that is engaged with for its own sake. The 
argument is certainly not being made for a revival of what Flanagan (1976, p. 1) 
termed ‘the occupational masochism’ of some aspects of social science that revel 
in a ‘jaded sense of impotency’. Similarly, it is not being suggested that we suc- 
cumb to what Leo Marx (1994) identifies as a ‘postmodern pessimism’ centred 
on the fatalistic acceptance of the ‘domination’ and ‘menace’ of life by large tech- 
nological systems. All that is being advocated here is that educational technology 
is approached from a position that expects nothing — a position that is not to be 
confused with the nihilistic position of wanting nothing, or even the sceptical 

=== PAGE 30 ===
16 Why Distrust Educational Technology? 
position of knowing nothing. Pessimistic educational technologists should neither 
celebrate nor welcome the constantly unsatisfactory situation of education and 
technology — rather they should “simply consider it their duty to call attention to 
it” (Dienstag 2006, p. x). 
This suggests approaching educational technology from a position similar to 
Gramsci’s notion of being ‘“‘a pessimist because of intelligence, but an optimist be- 
cause of will” (Gramsci 1929/1994, p. 299). In other words, this should be a pes- 
simism that recognises the usefulness of starting from a position that acknowledges 
the parameters and boundaries of any technological endeavour, and holds realistic 
expectations of the political struggles and conflicts that surround any social change. 
This knowledge can then be used to go on to inform political action conducted in a 
more optimistic spirit. As Holloway (2002, p. 8) reasons, “‘If the hope is not grounded 
firmly in that same bitterness of history, it becomes just a one-dimensional and silly 
expression of optimism’. Thus, while pessimistic educational technologists recognise 
that they may well be defeated in their ultimate ambitions, they should be in no way 
defeatist in their actions. It is therefore being proposed that the field of educational 
technology engages in pessimistic thought not from a sense of despondency, but as a 
sensibility from which political intervention and actions can be derived. Pessimism 
should not result in a passive resignation to one’s fate, but as an active engagement 
with continuous alternatives. Pessimism can therefore provide a powerful basis for 
exploring ways that educational technologies can be used by individuals to better 
survive within an inherently imperfect world. As Dienstag (2006, p. ix) concludes, 
In the right hands, pessimism can be — and ‘has been — an energizing and 
even liberating philosophy. While it does indeed ask us to limit and elimi- 
nate some of our hopes and expectations, it can also provide us with the 
means to better navigate the bounded universe it describes. 
Steps Towards Distrusting Educational Technology 
It should now be clear that educational technology is not as straightforward as 
we are often led to believe. In particular, this chapter has advanced the case that 
educational technology is not a neutral force for good that simply needs to be used 
in the ‘right’ or ‘best’ way to pay dividends. Instead, educational technology should 
be seen as a vehicle for a number of ideological agendas that subtly shape what 
educational technology is, and what educational technology does. Given all that 
has been discussed so far in this chapter, there would seem to be a pressing need 
to attempt, wherever possible, to challenge this current status quo of educational 
technology. In particular, there is a need to challenge the dominant ideological 
underpinnings of the educational application of digital technology, and therefore 
go some way to redressing the contradictions and conflicts that these forces sup- 
press. While the vast majority of people working with educational technology 
appear willing to ignore or “work around’ these contradictions, there is an urgent 
need nevertheless for these issues to be thought (and fought) ‘against’, 

=== PAGE 31 ===
Why Distrust Educational Technology? 
17 
As such, our starting position of‘ distrusting’ educational technology involves 
simply being willing to see digital technology for what it is, while also attempt- 
ing to imagine digital technology for all that it might be. First and foremost this 
involves questioning, challenging and carefully deconstructing the nature of the 
presumed digital transformations and changes with regard to contemporary forms 
of education that many commentators describe wholeheartedly and uncritically. 
Secondly, this needs to be done with a full awareness of the dominant ideologi- 
cal concerns of much educational technology reform to date. Thus we need to 
pursue a critical form of scrutiny which is perhaps less forward-looking, often less 
obvious and certainly less confirmatory than is usually found in academic writing 
on educational technology. 
There are a number of characteristics and qualities that we should strive to take 
forward into the remainder of this book. The first characteristic is to deliberately 
slow down the pace of our discussions in the face of the fast-moving, rapidly 
changing and often ephemeral nature of the topic. Indeed, the new media land- 
scapes of Facebook, Twitter and the iPad can often come across erroneously as 
somehow too fast-moving and mercurial to demand serious scrutiny. Jodi Dean 
(2010, p. 1), for one, has bemoaned the intellectual ‘challenge’ faced by any aca- 
demic who attempts to think critically and politically “about media practices in 
a setting where they are fast, fun and ubiquitous”. In order to counter these dis- 
tractions, there is a clear need for a deliberate de-acceleration of our discussions 
of digital technology and education. Amidst the speed, churn, ephemerality and 
plurality of the contemporary digital landscape, there is a danger that “we lose the 
capacity to grasp anything like a system” (Dean 2010, p. 3). Yet if one looks beyond 
the seemingly ephemeral surface features of digital culture, then a number of en- 
trenched issues of central importance to the contemporary educational condition 
are apparent. Given the endurance of these issues, a strong argument can there- 
fore be made for adopting a more de-accelerated, detached and disinterested gaze 
towards education and technology than is usually the case in popular discourses 
of digital technology. Although many people may consider it to be a dying, out- 
moded format, the cumbersome, long form of a printed book certainly allows for 
a detached, more considered and de-accelerated perspective on technology. 
Alongside this need to slow down, care also needs to be taken to not associate 
digital technology too readily with discourses of inevitable progress, transforma- 
tion and the allure of ‘the new’. Indeed, academic researchers should aiways take 
care that the apparent novelty of the technological near-future does not seduce 
them into overlooking the rather less novel realities of the present. As Peter Gold- 
ing’s (2000) description of ‘type one’ and ‘type two’ technologies reminds us, tech- 
nologies rarely enable new forms of activity that were previously impracticable 
or inconceivable (type two). More often than not, technologies allow existing 
social action and process to occur perhaps in a speedier, more efficient or more 
convenient manner (type one). Thus it is important to resist the temptation to un- 
thinkingly associate digital technologies with the inevitable change and progress 
associated with ‘type two’ technology. Instead researchers should remain mindful 

=== PAGE 32 ===
18 Why Distrust Educational Technology? 
of the continuities, recurrences and repetitions associated with most ‘new’ tech- 
nologies that are being used in education. In many instances, the cliché of ‘old 
wine in new bottles’ remains an appropriate description of the nature and forms 
of digital technology use in education. As such, one of the first steps when tak- 
ing a distrustful approach to technology and new media is being able to move 
beyond the never-ending ‘noise’ of technical upgrades and product reversioning, 
and instead identify the often obscured but nevertheless substantive social issues 
that persist beneath (Wessels 2010). It is therefore crucial to lose any residual 
‘wonder’ or ‘awe’ that one might have for the digital spectacular. As Geert Lovink 
reasons, in no sense should these technologies be perceived as fantastical. These 
are technologies that are now woven into the mundanity of everyday life and are 
therefore deserving of a dispassionate analysis: 
Let’s get real. We should start with the observation that the internet is now 
a mainstream technology. While its ever-changing qualities continue to fas- 
cinate us, there is nothing spectacular about it. We’ve gone post-spectacle. 
This is the information society made real. 
(Lovink 2011, p. 68) 
Following this lead, it is important to ground our analysis in the present-day 
uncertain realities of educational technology. Indeed, there is a need to be con- 
fident in the messy, uncertain nature of education and technology, and not feel 
obliged to present too certain or too neat a picture. While there is a tendency for 
discussions of education and technology to gravitate towards technicist notions 
of ‘best practice, ‘effectiveness’ and ‘what works’, it is far more accurate to see 
technological ‘progress’ as anything but predictable. 
To paraphrase Knud Logstrup 
(1997), ‘absolute certainty’ about the benefits of educational technology equates 
to ‘absolute irresponsibility’. Instead digital technologies are subjected continu- 
ally to complex interactions and negotiations with the social, economic, political 
and cultural contexts into which they are situated. Thus this book should strive 
to develop an analysis of the messy, uncertain present-day realities of education 
and technology as they are currently manifest. As John Holloway (2002, p. 67) 
concludes, “The study of society ...is the study of what is. The question of what 
ought to be may be interesting too [but] we must not confuse reality with dreams. 
As long as they are kept separate, there is no problem”. 
Conclusions 
This opening chapter has covered a lot of ground — much of which has pointed 
to the need to engage with the politics of education and technology. Above all, 
the sense has emerged that digital technology is certainly not an uncontested 
or uncontroversial area of education. Instead, it can be concluded that the use 
of digital technology in education needs to be understood as an intense site of 
conflict. Indeed, as Andrew Feenberg (1991, p. 14) puts it, “Technology is not 

=== PAGE 33 ===
Why Distrust Educational Technology? 
19 
destiny but a scene of struggle”. Education and technology can therefore be seen 
as a set of struggles that take place across a number of fronts — from the allocation 
of resources and the design of curricula to the maximizing of profit and attempts 
to overcome patterns of exclusion. As Wiebe Bijker (2010) reminds us, ‘how to 
use technology?’ is an inherently political question. Seen in this light, many of 
the key issues underpinning education and digital technology would appear to 
be the fundamentally political questions that are asked continually of education 
and society — that is, questions of what education is, and questions of what edu- 
cation should be. Developing a fuller sense of how and why digital technologies 
are being used in educational settings in the ways that they are therefore de- 
mands a broad recognition of issues of power, control, conflict and resistance. Put 
bluntly, any account of technology use in education needs to be framed in explicit 
terms of societal conflict over the distribution of power. As has also been argued 
throughout this chapter, such an approach demands a willingness to engage with 
the negative. As Apple, Ball and Gandin convlude, 
[We] must bear witness to negativity. That is, one of the primary functions is 
to illuminate the ways in which educational institutions, policies and prac- 
tices are connected to the relations of exploitation and domination — and to 
struggles against such relations — in the larger society. 
(2010, p. 5) 
Yet care has also been taken during this opening chapter to retain a sense of 
purpose. As has been stated before, the pessimistic approach does not imply that 
we need to adopt a nihilistic negativity with no hope or purpose. This approach 
also compels academic researchers to engage in work that aims to actually make 
a difference and that considers how education, technology and society might 
be made fairer. As implied throughout this chapter, the most valuable aspects of 
academic scrutiny of education.and technology stem from a commitment to fos- 
ter and support issues of empowerment, equality, social justice and participatory 
democracy. While no easy task, it should be possible to position the development 
of a critical analysis of education and technology within the underpinning aim 
of developing a critical disposition for “overt political struggle against oppressive 
social structures” (Harvey 1990, p. 20). 
Taking these issues forward therefore demands a refocusing of our attention. In 
developing an interest in the politics of education and technology, the next chapter 
further examines the specifics of contemporary educational technology as a site 
of struggle and contest. In particular, the case is made for approaching educational 
technology as ideology — thereby linking our specific concerns with digital educa- 
tion with wider struggles for power and control amongst social groups and elites. 
Above all, this involves identifying the connections between educational technology 
and contemporary capitalist society, as well as the social relations associated with the 
‘new economy’. When seen in this light, then there is certainly much about educa- 
tion and technology that we might consider ourselves to be distrustful of. 

=== PAGE 34 ===
2 
UNDERSTANDING EDUCATIONAL 
TECHNOLOGY AS IDEOLOGY 
Introduction 
As highlighted in Chapter 1, the reluctance of many people to think critically 
about digital technologies in education contrasts sharply with the political nature 
of technology. While some appetite was shown for oppositional thought during 
the 1980s and 1990s (see, for example, the writings’ 
of Michael Apple, CA Bowers, 
Hank Bromley, Larry Cuban, Ivor Goodson and Neil Postman), the vast majority 
of academic discussion of educational technology has tended to lie somewhere 
between a disinterested acceptance and a deep-rooted belief in the inherent ben- 
efits of technology for education. 
The framing of digital technology as a generally 
‘good thing’ has become an orthodoxy within education thinking — that is, part of 
a shared consensus where digital technologies have become “gradually accepted 
and virtually un-noticed”, often without “those who are affected registering the 
fact” (Lefebvre 1981/2007, p. 78). It could be argued that educational technology 
is now something that appears to barely require thinking about at all. In many 
ways, the use of digital technology in educational settings has reached a state of 
being ‘ideologically invisible’ (Nye 2007), with the basic rationality of educational 
technology accepted largely without question. 
This normalization of educational technology certainly requires critical atten- 
tion. While the hopes, beliefs and promises that surround digital technology may 
have a strong intuitive resonance, the commonsensical ‘stories’ of digital technol- 
ogy that are repeated and ‘retold’ throughout educational discussions and debates 
need to be problematized. Indeed, despite its comforting overtones one should 
always be highly suspicious of commonsensical thinking. As David Harvey (2005, 
p. 39) cautions, the commonsensical can be “profoundly misleading” — masking, 
obfuscating or disguising real problems and leaving important realities closed to 

=== PAGE 35 ===
Understanding Educational Technology as Ideology 
21 
questioning. With these warnings in mind, this chapter seeks to move beyond 
the orthodoxy of educational technology as a ‘good thing’ and, instead, prepare 
the ground for a deliberately political analysis of education and technology. In 
particular, it is argued that the ways in which digital technology is talked about 
and understood within educational circles reflect the ideological function of edu- 
cational technology. Thus from this point in the book onwards, we need to look 
beyond the “overbearing matter-of-factness” (Adorno 1981, p. 126) that charac- 
terizes most debates of education and technology and creates an illusion that these 
issues are free of political substance. Instead, this chapter develops a framework for 
identifying what these shaping ideological interests are, and exploring the conse- 
quences and outcomes of their dominance. 
Understanding Ideology 
First we need to develop a clear sense of what ideology is and how it operates. 
In a popular sense, the term ‘ideology’ is most often used to denote a general sys- 
tem of ideas, beliefs and values that guide action. For example, sports teams and 
multinational corporations are often said to have core guiding ‘ideologies’ that 
shape their success — such as the Dutch philosophy of ‘total football’ or Google’s 
much-cited maxim of‘don’t be evil’.Yet this bland everyday use of the word belies 
the significance of ‘ideology’ as a political concept, and its importance in under- 
standing patterns of power and dominance in contemporary society. For this we 
need to look over the past 150 years of political thought, starting with the work 
of Karl Marx. For Marx, the concept of ideology was related to the masking of 
the contradictions produced by the capitalist system in ways that contributed to 
its reproduction. These contradictions included the exploitation and domination 
of the working classes, and the dehumanizing social relations and inequalities that 
result throughout society. Put simply, Marx described ideologies as functioning to 
invert the relationships between different elements of the capitalist system, thereby 
concealing the real patterns of power. 
In this sense, Marx saw ideology as functioning to make these arrangements 
appear necessary, normal and congruous, and thereby helping to reproduce the 
dominance of one interest over the interests of others. Marx developed the un- 
derstanding that ideologies are inherently political devices centred on the no- 
tions of ‘inversion’ and ‘concealment’. One enduring example of the ideological 
concealment of contradiction can be seen in the ways in which markets tend to 
be presented and perceived as imbued with values of freedom and equality of 
opportunity, despite their underpinning inequalities and unfreedoms. Inversions 
such as these, Marx argued, lead to a ‘distorted consciousness’ throughout society 
that masks social and political contradictions. As such people’s collective attention 
is focused on ‘the sphere of appearances’ (e.g., the illusion of the free and equal 
market) as opposed to the ‘sphere of inner relations’ (e.g., the unequal realities of 
production). Thus for Marx, ideology represented “illusion, false consciousness, 

=== PAGE 36 ===
22 
Understanding Educational Technology as Ideology 
unreality, upside-down reality” (Williams 1985, p. 156), which functioned to offer 
justification and consolation for oppression under capitalism. 
While Marx’s original reading of ideology can be criticized as being overly 
holistic and unified, there is obvious merit in his analysis. In particular this reading 
highlights a number of key features of ideology that pertain to our current discus- 
sions of educational technology — not least the idea that ideologies are endowed 
with crucial political functions, ordering the social world and directing it towards 
certain activities while legitimating some practices and de-legitimating others. 
In other words, Marx demonstrates how ideologies exercise power by creating 
a framework within which decisions can be taken and sense be made of these 
decisions. Crucially, Marx highlights the fact that the dissemination of ideology 
can be an act of deliberate manipulation, but also can be an unconscious or self- 
deceptive process. As such, ideologies contain levels of meaning that are hidden 
from their consumers and often from their producers. Marx’s analysis is also useful 
in highlighting the pervasiveness of dominant ideologies in a society. These domi- 
nant ideologies often appear to ‘belong’ or be ‘driven’ by no one in particular. 
Instead, they are seen as part of the wider cultural and social milieu and moulded 
by long-standing social and historical circumstances. 
One of the key challenges of 
any study of ideology, therefore, is to attempt to identify and then decode these 
dominant ideologies — “identifying structures, contexts, and motives that are not 
readily visible” (Freeden 2003, p. 11). 
Of course, these initial definitions prompted 150 years of subsequent debate 
and refinement. As Raymond Williams describes, many writers after Marx saw 
ideology less as a holistic mass illusion and in more bounded terms of specific 
forms of domination by “a given set of material interests or, more broadly, from 
a definite class or group” (Williams 1985, p. 156). Thus subsequent political phi- 
losophers and theorists have refined the notion of ideology. away from the idea 
of a class-wide distortion and instead described it in more specific terms of the 
domination of one interest over others. For example, Gyérgy Lukacs wrote of ide- 
ology as the individualist consciousness of the bourgeois classes. Conversely, Karl 
Mannheim highlighted the pluralist potential of ideologies to play a central part 
in the attempts of different groups to exercise power — thus raising the possibility 
of competing ideological systems emerging from different modes of existence. 
One of the key twentieth-century descriptions of ideology was that of Anto- 
nio Gramsci. In his writing Gramsci also moved away from the idea that ideology 
acted as a distorted form of mass consciousness, but instead described it as a system 
of ideas with a “capacity to inspire concrete attitudes and give certain orienta- 
tions for action” (Larrain 2007, p. 86). Gramsci wrote of ideologies functioning to 
allow one class to exercise ‘hegemony’ over others — that is, winning consent to 
position a system of ideas or ‘worldview’ as the common sense of the majority. In 
this sense the notion of ideology as hegemony does not describe the imposition 
of false ideas from the dominant onto the dominated. Rather hegemony refers to 
a continually negotiated and often compromised ‘common sense’ that takes place 

=== PAGE 37 ===
Understanding Educational Technology as Ideology 
23 
between dominant and less dominant groups. 
As Raymond Williams (1980, p. 37) 
observed, these processes are often so all-encompassing that they often escape 
close attention: 
[hegemony] supposes the existence of something which is truly total ... but 
which is lived at such a depth, which saturates society to such an extent, 
and which even constitutes the substance and the limit of common sense 
for most people under its sway, that it corresponds to the reality of [their] 
social experience. 
Crucially in Gramsci’s analysis, ideological hegemony can be exercised not just 
through state force but also through various cultural means — thus drawing at- 
tention towards the “manufacturing of consent among the population at large, 
so that the masses would regard their own assent as spontaneous” (Freeden 2003, 
p. 20). This understanding of the cultural and social manufacturing of consent and 
compliance was extended in the work of Louis Althusser, who highlighted the 
existence of ideology in a material form across a wide range of social practices — 
most obviously the actions and behaviours of social institutions such as the family, 
religious and educational organizations. 
These latter writers highlight the neces- 
sary production of compromise between dominant ideological interests and sub- 
ordinate groups, alongside the importance of the underlying forces that produce 
an illusion of voluntarism, free choice and consent. Later writers have therefore 
tended to view ideology as a pervasive means of manipulation and persuasion, 
rather than a means of direct repression. Jiirgen Habermas, for example, wrote 
of the construction of ‘reason’ and ‘uncoerced consensus’ through what is said as 
well as what is done. This reading usefully highlights the importance of language 
and what Habermas referred to as ‘systematically distorted communication’ in the 
construction and maintenance of ideological thought. Rather than attempting 
to identify all-encompassing ideologies, Habermas recognised the importance of 
‘fragmented’ rather than ‘false’ consciousness in advanced industrial societies. In this 
sense, Habermas described what he saw as the replacement of all-encompassing 
ideologies with more fragmented and partial frameworks of knowledge emanating 
from ‘expert cultures’. This fragmented consciousness produced a divisive condi- 
tion of ‘obscurity’ rather than total concealment or distortion. 
As these latter examples imply, contemporary writers and thinkers have tended 
to approach ideology in less holistic terms than Marx’s initial analysis. Rather 
than describing the universal repressive imposition of the beliefs and will of one 
dominant interest over all others, the notion of ideology is now understood in 
more nuanced terms as the manipulation of understandings in an attempt to 
legitimate the interests of particular groups and interests. Approached 
in this man- 
ner, the notion of ideology is concerned with ongoing struggles for meaning and 
understanding throughout a society. Indeed, as John Thompson (1990, p. 56) has 
argued, it is meaning rather than any other form of interaction that best “serves 

=== PAGE 38 ===
24 
Understanding Educational Technology as Ideology 
to establish and sustain relations of domination”. As such, ideology is perhaps 
best understood as seeking to ‘de-contest’ or naturalise the meanings of political 
terms by converting the variety of possible meanings and interpretations into a re- 
duced, simplified certainty that becomes the common consensus (Freeden 2003). 
For writers such as Laclau and Mouffe (1985), ideology is pursued increasingly 
through discursive practices that shape both the subject and the nature of reality 
itself — that is, what is said about something eventually becomes that thing. In this 
sense ideologies can be understood as attempting to naturalise subject positions 
by seeking to (re)establish closure wherever there are ‘open’ areas of discussion or 
disagreement. 
Thus in taking these arguments forward in our analysis of educational techno- 
logy, we need to recognise the complexity of ideology in contemporary society — 
not least the deep-rooted permeation of the values of dominant ideological 
interests into the fabric of everyday social processes and practices. Indeed, despite 
the sophisticated and ever-changing times that we now consider ourselves to be 
living in, many areas of contemporary society continue to be beset by dominant 
paradigms and mindsets, commonsensical thinking, worldviews, understandings of 
the ‘status quo’, ‘neutral’ assumptions and facts. Thus as Zygmunt Bauman (2001, 
pp. 10-11) describes, 
Ideology is not so much an articulated creed, a set of verbal statements to 
be learned and believed; it is, rather, incorporated in the way people live — 
‘soaked in’ by the way people act and relate. Once the hegemony has been 
achieved, hints and clues pointing in the wrong direction (wrong from the 
point of view of the actors’ interests) are densely scattered all over the world 
within which the actors put their lives together; there is no more possibi- 
lity of avoiding them or of unmasking their fraudulence so long as it is just 
their own life experiences that the actors much rely on in setting their ‘life 
projects’ and planning their actions. No brainwashing is required — the im- 
mersion in daily life shaped by the pre-set and pre-scripted rules will be 
quite enough to keep the actors on the set course. 
The Dominant Ideologies of Contemporary 
Society and Technology 
When seen in these terms, strong arguments can be made for digital technol- 
ogy acting as one of the key ‘mechanisms’ for giving dominant ideologies a ‘real 
existence’ in contemporary society (Boltanski & Chiapello 1999/2005). There is 
certainly widespread acceptance across the broader social science literatures of the 
ideological nature of technology. Indeed, over 30 years of writing and research 
from within the sociologies of technology, knowledge and science have detailed 
how all technologies are laden to some extent with values and embedded so- 
cial relations. As Andrew Feenberg (1999, p. 83) contends, technology therefore 

=== PAGE 39 ===
Understanding Educational Technology as Ideology 
25 
should be seen as “a site of social struggle” through which hegemonic positions 
are developed, legitimated, reproduced and challenged. Indeed, the idea of digital 
technology as ideology was a recurrent theme throughout the work of Henri 
Lefebvre during the 1970s and 1980s, arguing that the emerging computerized 
and telecommunications technologies of the time served mainly to imbue, rein- 
force and ‘nourish’ ideology. Similarly, at the beginning of the 1990s Neil Postman 
coined the phrase ‘technopoly’ to denote the pervasive conflation of information 
technology and ideology throughout the latter half of the twentieth century. Paul 
Virilio also pointed to the ways in which digital technologies are bound within 
a distinctly militarist ideology. More recently, writers such as Nicholas Garnham 
(2000) critiqued the dominant views of ‘digital age’ and ‘information society’ as 
profoundly ideological in their role in engineering consent and acceptance of 
major economic, cultural and social reorderings of society. 
If we are to develop a similar analysis for contemporary forms of educational 
technology, it is important to first identify the dominant ideologies that inform 
and underpin the prevailing ‘major economic, cultural and social reorderings of 
society’, and therefore could be said to drive contemporary enthusiasms for digital 
technology. Thus before we go on to consider the specific details of educational 
technology as ideology, it is necessary to consider the deep-rooted ideologies that 
permeate contemporary society and contemporary forms of digital technology. 
While not always apparent or wholly consistent, it could be argued that digital 
technology has long been intertwined with a closely related set of dominant 
contemporary ideologies — that is, libertarianism, neo-liberalism and what can be 
termed the ‘new’ capitalism. 
The nature of these ideologies will now be outlined 
in further detail. 
|, Libertarian Ideology 
One increasingly dominant ideology over the past 50 years has been the libertar- 
ian belief in the primacy of the individual. Indeed, libertarian discourses have long 
pervaded the meanings and understandings attached to digital technology — a trend 
described by writers such as Langdon Winner (1997) as ‘cyber-libertarianism’. 
Here, the power of technology and the power of the individual — what Kelemen 
and Smith (2001, p. 371) describe as “two ideas which lie at the heart of modern 
civilization” — are seen as creating new forms of action and organization that do 
not require the appropriation of traditional spaces or structures. Of course, lib- 
ertarian ideology long precedes the advent of digital technology — originating 
in debates surrounding slavery and feudal rights, and therefore spanning back to 
the concerns of the founders of the US bill of rights. Indeed, a basic trust in the 
moral and political primacy of the individual and a corresponding sense of self- 
ownership can be traced back to John Locke’s (1690/2010, para. 27) assertion that 
“Every man has a Property in his own Person”. 
As this demonstrates, an enduring 
tenet of libertarian thinking is the primacy of the individual. Libertarianism sees 

=== PAGE 40 ===
26 
Understanding Educational Technology as Ideology 
the control for one’s actions coming from within the individuals themselves, with 
everyone having the right to strive for whatever goals and outcomes they see fit. 
In this sense, society is seen as being best organized along meritocratic lines of 
self-ownership and individual control of resources. 
This notion of individuals pursuing their own rational self-interest has proved to 
be especially seductive within North American culture, which it could be argued 
“has always celebrated radical individualism, as epitomized by the image of the 
frontiersman”’ (Palley 2005, p. 21). Thus the libertarianism of the early twenty-first 
century could be seen as a particularly American strain of individualism — with its 
emphasis on personal responsibility, self-management and self-sufficiency, coupled 
with reduced levels of government control and control from the state (Sennett 
2012). 
Yet we should not overlook the humanist tone of libertarian ideology. In 
its purest form, libertarianism presents a generally trusting and positive view of 
human nature, in which people learn from their mistakes and rationally try their 
best. As Moseley (2007, p. 88) describes it, “The general vision ...is that of a man 
[sic] set free from men, developing his talents and exchanging freely with others 
voluntarily”. Ayn Rand, a key influence on recent libertarian thinking, argued for 
an ethical and moral dimension, where people should be protected against those 
who impose violence or a threat, while striving for an independence from oth- 
ers. This, then, is not an exclusively individualist doctrine — a social life is seen as 
necessary for individual advancement, and the benefits of cooperating, collabora- 
tion and exchanging are seen as key to survival and success. Libertarianism there- 
fore acknowledges “the relations that exist amongst people but maintains that 
the acting individual always acts of his own volition — even when running with 
the crowd” (Moseley 2007, p. 87). 
It is perhaps not surprising that libertarian ideology has been aligned closely 
with the development of digital technology. It can be argued that digital technol- 
ogy offers a ready canvas for various strains of libertarian thinking to be imagined 
and (in part) operationalized — in particular the privileging of the sovereign user 
and the principles of self-responsibilization and self-determination. For example, 
computer use has long been based upon a valorisation of the empowered indi- 
vidual user, living “a world where anyone can learn to become a creator of in- 
formation or code that can help to transform their lives and societies” (Palfrey & 
Gasser 2011, p. 195). Conversely, celebrants of the new digital economy — the so- 
called ‘digerati’ of Wired magazine, Silicon Valley and the NASDAQ — hold simi- 
lar deep-rooted views of the potential for individually driven progress through 
technology. As Geert Lovink describes, this is an area of business that is devoid 
of traditional political beliefs but based around a loose ‘freewheeling ethic’ where 
the internet offers a largely “unregulated sphere” for individual entrepreneurship 
(Lovink 2011, p. 1). The majority of academic writing and research on digital 
technology and media takes a similar line on the empowered individual. As Miller 
(2011, p. 230) argues, “Much of the field buys into individualistic fantasies of 
reader, audience, consumer or player autonomy — [the] intellectual’s wet dream 

=== PAGE 41 ===
Understanding Educational Technology as Ideology 
27 
of music, movies, television and everything else converging under the sign of the 
empowered fans’’. 
It is therefore clear that ideologies of individualism and libertarianism are em- 
bedded deeply within many aspects of the application of digital technology in 
society. This, it would seem, is consistent regardless of political conviction or so- 
cial standing. As Harper (2009, p. 148) observes, “According to the majority of 
internet pundits, whether e-business billionaires or left-wing academics: internet 
equals freedom”. Thus the notion of ‘techno-libertarian utopia’ has proved to 
be a ‘strong meme’ throughout the history of digital technology and media, not 
least the idea of digital technology “as a tool for personal freedom” (Lovink 2011, 
p. 39). However, it is important not to be seduced into a technological determin- 
ist reading of digital technologies somehow causing these shifts to occur. The key 
point here is that libertarianism and individualism are cultural and ideological 
shifts that have long informed the organization of many societies and “whose 
logic is finally simply playing itself out in our technological and social institu- 
tions” (Song 2010, p. 270). 
Il. Neo-liberal Ideology 
The second set of meanings and understandings attached to contemporary digi- 
tal technology is that of neo-liberalism. As an ideological form, neo-liberalism 
extends libertarian notions of individual liberty, self-responsibility and personal 
entrepreneurism with an explicit belief in consumer choice and market freedom, 
coupled with the dominance of private interests over the workings of the state 
(Ball 2012). For many commentators, neo-liberalism has been a dominant ideol- 
ogy across societies for the past 30 years. As David Harvey (2005, p. 3) argues, 
“Nieoliberalism has, in short, become hegemonic as a mode of discourse. It has 
pervasive effects on ways of thought to the point where it has become incorpo- 
rated into the commonsense way many of us interpret, live in and understand 
the world”. While some people now claim wishfully that the dominance of neo- 
liberalism was undermined fatally by the global economic crises of the late 2000s 
and early 2010s, neo-liberal ideology has proved remarkably adaptable and resil- 
ient. As Peters (2011, p. 5) observes, 
“It is undeniably still the ruling ideology even 
though it has transmuted in form a number of times”. 
It is important to distinguish between the often flawed application of neo-liberal 
ideology in practice and its more abstract form as what Charles Taylor (2004) de- 
scribes as a ‘social imaginary’ — that is, as a set of ideas and ideals telling us what is 
normal and what is possible. In this sense Nick Couldry (2010) makes the distinc- 
tion between the economic ‘workings’ of ‘neo-liberal proper’ and the theoretical 
forms of political and social organization suggested by ‘neo-liberal doctrine’. In 
this more theoretical sense of doctrine, neo-liberalism can be understood as an 
unfinished project seeking to remould the world in its image. 
As such, “the neolib- 
eral model does not purport so much to describe the world as it is, but the world 

=== PAGE 42 ===
28 
Understanding Educational Technology as Ideology 
as it should be” (Clarke 2005, p. 58). Neo-liberalism should not be seen simply as 
a business template concerned with increasing the prominence of the market and 
diminishing the power of the nation state and other market ‘impediments’. Instead, 
as a social imaginary, neo-liberalism “‘involves a broader range of underlying prin- 
ciples, ultimately political values that are deeply embedded” (Couldry 2010, p. 22). 
Echoing the libertarian ideology, one key set of values in neo-liberal thought is 
the primacy of unimpeded individual action. Neo-liberalism therefore promotes 
individual responsibilization and the self as enterprise, with the onus placed on 
the values of self-interest, individual entrepreneurialism and competition (Hilgers 
2010). As Harvey (2005, p. 65) details, “Each individual is held responsible and 
accountable for his or her own actions and well-being”. Against this individual- 
ism, it is the ‘spontaneous order’ of the market that is seen as the best means of 
preserving individual freedoms while also establishing a societal order. Indeed, 
markets are seen as optimal and self-regulating social structures that function best 
without restraint. This leads to an occupancy of a language of ‘choice’ and rela- 
tions of competition as the most efficient way of allocating resources, as well as 
the most efficient way of achieving human freedom (Munck 2005). One of the 
key tenets of this privileging of the market is the removal of ‘artificial distortions’ 
from the path of free and equal exchange (Colas 2005). Neo-liberalism is there- 
fore imbued with a strong opposition to state-led ‘social engineering’, not least 
the welfare state. As such, neo-liberalism seeks to cede responsibility of the state 
to individual self-concerns, with the role of the state reduced, at most, to creating 
and preserving an institutional framework appropriate to strong private property 
rights, free markets and free trade — ideally at the global level (Harvey 2005). 
In many ways, neo-liberalism has lent philosophical support to the twentieth- 
century free market economics of Hayek, Popper and Berlin and the corresponding 
view of the individual homo economicus as “an egoistic, rational, utility maximizer”’ 
(Hind 2010, p. 83). Seen in this light, “every area of human life [becomes] sub- 
ject to reorganization on economic principles, with economic thought becoming 
coterminous with rationality itself” (Couldry 2010, p. 28). Yet it is important not 
to portray neo-liberal thought solely in terms of individual economic rationality. 
Neo-liberalism can be seen as offering an alternative societal model to centralism 
and thereby offering an escape from government domination for those who previ- 
ously were unable to exercise choice. Neo-liberalism does not necessarily oppose 
the social and the communal. Indeed, neo-liberalism offers a model of a shared 
communal market — albeit one that individuals are not obliged to participate in. 
As Couldry (2010, p. 135) describes, the key moral underpinning of neo-liberal 
ideology is “the individual’s sense of control over his or her own life ... On this 
view, cooperation, though often desirable, is purely a matter of individual will”, 
Ill. The Ideology of ‘New Economy’ 
Clearly neo-liberal ideology is linked intrinsically with the organization of capi- 
talism and capitalist relations. Indeed, for some commentators, neo-liberalism is 

=== PAGE 43 ===
Understanding Educational Technology as Ideology 
29 
primarily a system of justification and legitimization for “re-establish[ing] the 
conditions for capital accumulation and to restore the power of economic elites” 
(Harvey 2005, p. 19). As Andrew Glyn (2007) puts it, neo-liberalism is ‘capitalism 
unleashed’. The fact that the term ‘capitalism’ has been obscured largely by the 
term ‘neo-liberalism’ over the past 30 years is, for some commentators, indicative 
of the hegemony of capitalist relations and “capitalism’s ideological triumph” 
(Zizek 2008, p. 337). Thus we must also look beyond ‘neo-liberal’ ideology and 
consider the meanings and understandings attached to digital technology relating 
to the nature and needs of contemporary capitalism. 
As has been noted widely, the nature of capitalism has shifted considerably over 
the past 40 years or so. Throughout the 1970s and 1980s a number of structural 
changes in economic relations were being described by commentators in terms of 
‘post-industrial’ society, ‘post-Fordist’ modes of production, the ‘knowledge econ- 
omy’ and the information society. All these labels reflected shifts towards what 
Harvey (1990) terms ‘flexible accumulation’ — that is, the emergence of flexible 
labour markets and labour processes, as well as increasingly flexible patterns of 
production and consumption. These structural changes in capitalism were based 
around a decline in traditional industry and industrial economies, with the sig- 
nificance of industrial labour usurped by “a more heavily financialized and image- 
based system of giobal exchange” (Brennan 2011, p. 1). 
Key to the changes associated with the rise of the ‘new economy’ is the notion 
that these new forms of production, consumption and profit are largely imma- 
terial in nature. As Ekman (2012) notes, the organization of the new economy 
is based largely around the privatization of ‘immaterial’ assets that were previ- 
ously outside the realms of capital accumulation — such as knowledge, genetic 
material and reproduction processes. This has been a key thesis developed by the 
‘autonomist’ Marxist school of thought, which points to the extension of labour, 
production and exploitation beyond the established boundaries of industrial capi- 
talism. In terms of the principal modes of production under these new conditions, 
the autonomist writers have highlighted the growing significance of ‘immaterial 
labour’ — that is, “labour that creates immaterial products, such as knowledge, in- 
formation, communication, a relationship, or an emotional response” (Hardt & 
Negri 2004, p. 108). In this sense, profit is gained from the production of knowl- 
edge and ideas rather than industry, therefore requiring new models of capital 
accumulation. Christian Fuchs (2008, p. 103), for example, contrasts traditional 
forms of manual labour that work primarily to change the physical condition of 
objects with what he termed ‘informational labour’, which works to change “the 
emotional and communicative aspects of human relations”, 
As Fuchs and others suggest, digital technologies are an integral element of 
these recent shifts towards globally networked capitalism, just as the steam en- 
gine and other industrial-age technologies were central to earlier ‘mutations’ of 
capitalism (Savat 2009). The computer can therefore be described with some 
justification as the ‘universal instrument’ of recent times — “today the computer 
corresponds to what the electrical motor was a century ago, and the steam engine 

=== PAGE 44 ===
30 
Understanding Educational Technology as Ideology 
before then” (Maraizzi 1994/2011, p.68). Commentators have identified a number 
of ‘new’ varieties of capitalism that are predicated upon computerized processes 
and practices — such as digital capitalism, virtual capitalism, high-tech capitalism, 
informatic capitalism and informational capitalism. One significant description 
is ‘cognitive capitalism’ (Vercellone 2007), highlighting the importance of ‘cog- 
nitive labour’ that is intellectual, communicative, symbolic and emotional in its 
substance, and therefore concerned with working with forms of language and 
communication that can be digitalized. The notion of cognitive capitalism also 
foregrounds the importance of networked and highly social modes of coopera- 
tive production within contemporary capitalism. These themes are extended into 
the notion of ‘communicative capitalism’, which highlights the growing com- 
modification of everyday life — not least online communication and interaction 
(Dean 2012).As Maraizzi (1994/2011) contends, the emphasis here is on forms of 
information, language and communication that are ultraprecise, ultralogical (i.e., 
that have shared rules and grammar that can be used anywhere) and ultraformal 
(i.e., ‘abstract, artificial, completely symbolic’). These are forms of information, 
language and communication that thereby lend themselves to easy symboliza- 
tion, codification and instrumentalized calculation, (Maraizzi 1994/2011). Also 
along these lines is the growth of ‘algorithmic capitalism’, reliant on the use of 
technology-based systems in easily sequentialized and logicized areas of society 
such as financial markets and the law. 
All these digitally based forms of capitalism are seen as having created an al- 
tered set of economic demands. For example, in terms of forms of work, the new 
economy is seen as demanding the extension and intensification of post-Fordist 
forms of labour. Thus the work skills of the new economy are based around 
skills and dispositions relating to multitasking, autonomy, creativity, ‘innovation’ 
and networked and cooperative forms of working, as well as malleability of 
working practices (Boltanski & Chiapello 1999/2005). 
This has been reflected 
in the recent popularisation of concepts of ‘lean production’, team concepts, 
‘just-in-time’ production, mobile capital and the diversification of commodities 
for niche markets. 
The importance of these qualities reflects the fact that the 
work of the new economy is less bounded and delineated — leading to a total- 
ized and permanent state of work. For example, Negri (1984) noted the move 
from the industrial ‘mass worker’ producing consumer goods in a factory to 
the ‘social worker’ whose work has expanded beyond the workplace and into 
most aspects of society. In this sense, the new economy is seen as encompassing 
most areas of everyday life as potential sources of profit generation. 
This blur- 
ring of boundaries is also seen as existing between the domains of production 
and consumption. In the new economy, it is argued, one of the key individual 
subjectivities is the ability to consume as well as the ability to produce. Con- 
temporary capitalism, therefore, is seen as built around a dominant ‘consumerist 
life pattern’ across all areas of life, where “consumer markets expand, thrive and 
profit by commodifying the pursuit of fun, comfort and happiness” (Bauman 
20 12a; p.216); 

=== PAGE 45 ===
Understanding Educational Technology as Ideology 
31 
Understanding Educational Technology as Ideology 
There are clear links between the development of digital technology and all of 
the dominant ideologies just described — especially in terms of the understand- 
ings and meanings that are popularly attached to digital devices and digital prac- 
tices. It could be reasoned that digital technologies have a two-way relationship 
with ideologies of individualism, neo-liberalism and the new economy -— clearly 
being shaped by these dominant values and interests, but also acting to perpetu- 
ate the dominance of those values and interests in wider society. Indeed, digital 
technologies can be seen as a key material form of these ideologies over the past 
few decades — embodying the values, dispositions and mindsets of libertarianism, 
neo-liberalism and new forms of capitalism while extending them into the so- 
cial practices and relations of everyday life. There is a growing literature that de- 
tails the full extent of these connections between everyday digital technology use 
and the hegemony of contemporary individualized, neo-liberal, capitalist society. 
Dyer-Witheford and de Peuter’s (2009) analysis of video gaming, for example, 
demonstrated how each stage of the production and consumption of video games 
(from the design studio to the bedroom) can be linked to the cultural, political 
and economic interests of global capital. Conversely, Melissa Gregg’s (2010) study 
of white-collar ‘office’ technologies of laptop computers and email showed how 
these digital devices and applications extend flexible capitalist working practices 
into every aspect of everyday life, fuelling a growing alienation and disaffection 
with work and family life. Similar studies have highlighted the ideological na- 
ture of web-searching, mobile telephony and social networking (Eichstaedt 2011; 
Mager 2012; Sevignani 2012). These correspondences may not always be consis- 
tent and are rarely obvious, but must be taken seriously when trying to make sense 
of the significance of digital technology in contemporary society. 
In this sense, we now need to begin to consider how these dominant ideolo- 
gies may correspond with the specific domain of educational technology. Thus, 
while it may not appear immediately obvious, we now need to explore the idea 
that the digital technologies used increasingly throughout education are also best 
understood as ideological in character and form — that is, shaped by dominant sets 
of values and interests, and then acting (however subtly) to perpetuate the domi- 
nance of those values and interests. This — in itself — is not an especially novel set 
of contentions to make. Ivor Goodson and John Marshall Mangan, for example, 
made a persuasive series of arguments nearly 20 years ago that computers in 
schools were key sites for the expression, maintenance and extension of domi- 
nant ideologies of economic competitiveness and the development of ‘high skills’. 
These authors argued that it was essential to approach the technologizing of edu- 
cation as what they termed an “ideologically freighted innovation” (Goodson & 
Mangan 1996, p. 65). Similarly, as Michael Apple argued 10 years before, 
The debate about the role of the new technology in [education] is not and 
must not be just about the technical correctness of what computers can 

=== PAGE 46 ===
32 
Understanding Educational Technology as Ideology 
and cannot do. These may be the least important kinds of questions, in fact. 
Instead, at the very core of the debate are the ideological and ethical issues 
concerning what [education] should be about and whose interests they 
should serve. 
(Apple 1986, p. 153) 
Despite their voracity, these arguments have remained largely absent from the 
academic study of education and technology. Most people, it would seem, are 
happy to assume that educational technologies are ‘neutral’ tools that are essentially 
free from values and intent (or, at most, shaped by generally optimistic understand- 
ings and meanings associated with educational change and improvement). In this 
sense, it is difficult at first glance to see educational technology as entwined with 
any aspect of the dominant ideologies just described. Yet, as was noted earlier, 
one of the core characteristics of hegemony is the ability of dominant ideologies 
to permeate commonsensical understandings and meaning. Following this logic, 
then, the fact that educational technology appears to be driven by a set of values 
focused on the improvement of education does not preclude it also serving to sup- 
port and legitimate wider dominant ideological interests. Indeed, if we take time 
to unpack the general orthodoxy of educational technology as a ‘positive’ attempt 
to improve education, then a variety of different social groups and with different 
interests, values and agendas are apparent. 
As will now be argued, while concerned 
ostensibly with changing specific aspects of education, all of these different inter- 
ests could be said to also endorse (or at least provide little opposition to) notions 
of libertarianism, neo-liberalism and new forms of capitalism. Thus educational 
technologies can still be said to be ‘ideologically freighted’, although this may not 
always be a primary intention of those involved in promoting their use. 
These are complex contentions, and clearly require further justification. 
Thus 
before these arguments are explored in further detail, the remainder of this chapter 
will unpack briefly the general consensus of educational technology as a ‘positive 
project’. What values and interests lie beneath the promotion of educational tech- 
nology over the past 30 years, and to what extent could they be said to constitute 
an ideology of educational technology? In considering these points, a number of 
distinct values and agendas can be identified that could be said to constitute the 
positive project of educational technology, and therefore merit closer consideration. 
!, Learner-centred Learning 
Perhaps most obviously, digital technologies are seen by many educationalists as 
fitting neatly with a number of values and interests relating to the nature and orga- 
nization of learning. In this sense, many people’s interest in educational technology 
is underpinned by a dominant set of values stemming from progressive educa- 
tion ideals and/or social constructivist and sociocultural models of learning — all 
of which privilege learner-centred and learner-driven forms of education. These 

=== PAGE 47 ===
Understanding Educational Technology as Ideology 
33 
approaches share a view that learning is a profoundly social and cultural process and 
therefore emphasise the influence of the social environments that surround an in- 
dividual’s learning and cognitive development. Seen along the lines of sociocultural 
theories of learning — particularly the (post) Vygotskian tradition — digital technol- 
ogies act as powerful social resources within an individual’s learning context (see 
Luckin 2010). In particular, this approach frames digital technology as a key means 
of providing learners with enhanced access to sources of knowledge and expertise 
that exist outside of their immediate environment. There is now considerable inter- 
est, for example, in the field of‘computer-supported collaborative learning’, where 
individuals collaborate and learn at a distance via digital tools. Similarly, there is 
much enthusiasm for the ability of digital technology to support social-cultural 
forms of ‘situated learning’ and the associated notion of ‘communities of practice’. 
These terms describe learning as best taking place in the form of ‘real-world’ activi- 
ties and interactions between people and their social environments. 
For some educators, these pedagogic and epistemological values extend into 
a belief that digital technology can support ‘progressive’, nonauthoritarian forms 
of educational engagement. These include child-centred learning and open forms 
of teaching which emphasise meaning making and interpretation, as well as en- 
couraging learner autonomy and dispersal of power. In this sense, enthusiasm for 
digital technology use in education chimes with the Deweyian philosophy that 
underpins much contemporary Western educational thought. Here education is 
seen as concerned primarily with the development of persons, and helping indi- 
viduals acquire the knowledge and understanding that enable them to live fully 
human lives as well as belonging to a wider community through appropriate ac- 
tions and commitments (Pring 2010). Digital technologies are therefore seen as 
playing a key role in redefining most of the core aspects of education along these 
lines, not least the redefinition of the teacher's role, the reconceptualization of 
learner action and the relationship between learning and knowledge. 
While these beliefs and assertions tend to be presented as empirical ‘fact’ it is 
important to view them as driven by both objective and subjective debate — much 
like other ideologically driven ‘scientific’ debates such as climate change or green 
economics. Indeed, many of the ‘learning science’ descriptions of digital techno- 
logy are driven by wider beliefs of what constitutes ‘good’ or ‘desirable’ learn- 
ing. As such, many of these justifications position digital technology as a form 
of pedagogic corrective — that is, a means to get particular learning values and 
philosophies into formal educational settings that are otherwise seen as lacking. 
Some educational technologists refer to this as the “Trojan Mouse’ approach — that 
is, using digital technology as a means to ‘leverage’ wider philosophies of teaching 
and learning into educational settings. As Eric Klopfer (2008, p. 12) acknowledges, 
“Tt isn’t all about the technology ... Many of these skills [have] been promoted 
by education reformers for decades, and could be fostered without technology. 
Technology, however, is the vehicle for getting these intellectual capabilities into 
schools discretely”. 

=== PAGE 48 ===
34 
Understanding Educational Technology as Ideology 
Il. The Efficiencies of Education 
A further set of interests and values that are prominent within the general promo- 
tion of educational technology is concerned with issues of enhanced organizational 
effectiveness and efficiency, rather than individual or collective empowerment. 
As such, the use of digital technology in education is also justified as fulfilling vari- 
ous criteria relating to the ‘economics’ of education (see Ball 2007). These include 
the idea of technology contributing to the efficient logistics of educational provi- 
sion; the idea of technology contributing to the profitability and commoditization 
of education; and the idea of technology contributing to countries’ economic 
competitiveness and efficiency of labour and knowledge production. 
In terms of the first criterion, for example, clear linkages are made by some 
social groups between educational technology and a general desire to see the 
‘modernization’ and ‘incentivization’ of public sector services through techniques 
of management derived from the for-profit sector. These values therefore position 
educational technology within issues of efficiency, effectiveness, modernization, 
rationalization and the reduction of spending costs (Deem 2004). In this sense, 
digital technology is seen as supporting the recasting of education along more 
business-orientated centralized ‘data-driven’ lines. Indeed, there has been a steady 
rise of discernible technology-supported managerial practices that are now preva- 
lent throughout many sectors of education — from systems of self-evaluation and 
performance management, intensified managerial control of curricula, standardi- 
zed labour processes and the introduction of accountability mechanisms. The 
enrolment of digital technologies into these debates therefore lends a distinctly 
technocratic air to how contemporary education is being imagined — with many 
discussions imbued with a sense of ‘digital Taylorism’ (Brown, Lauder & Ashton 
2011), reflecting what Lasch (1987, p. 87) termed “technology and the ideology 
of total control”. 
There is also a clear sense amongst some social groups that digital technology 
can contribute to the profitability and commoditization of education. A notable 
belief here is the use of technology as a vehicle for the establishment of ‘genuine’ 
markets in education — characterized by “‘no state intervention of any kind, in 
funding, provision or regulation” (Tooley 2006, p. 26). In one sense, these argu- 
ments are driven by a procorporate interest in supporting the expanding mar- 
ketplace for technology-based education. 
Yet these values also convey a desire to 
reorganize and rearrange all aspects of education along market-based lines. It is 
important to note that these arguments are not profit-driven per se; indeed there 
are a growing number of market fundamentalists who are “inspired by the non- 
commercial possibilities of social production and social networks” (Freedman 
2012, p. 77). Nevertheless, the technology-supported removal of the state from 
the provision of public education has been anticipated by a range of articulations 
of the ‘end of school’ and realizing the “dream of education without the state” 
(Tooley 2006, p. 22). 

=== PAGE 49 ===
Understanding Educational Technology as Ideology 
35 
Finally, the use of digital technology in education has long been promoted as 
contributing to countries’ economic competitiveness and efficiency of labour and 
knowledge production. In particular, much government interest in educational 
technology is imbued with a belief that digital technology can act as a means of 
increasing a nation’s economic competitiveness in the knowledge-driven econo- 
mies of the post-industrialized world. As such, it can be argued that national 
educational technology agendas have been conceived and perpetuated by nation 
states as a concerted attempt to reconfigure the economic ‘mindset’ of future 
workers towards a technologically based global competition. 
The emphasis here is 
on upgrading the skills base of emerging generations of young people and creat- 
ing the ‘workforce flexibility’ to counter the threat of a global labour market. As 
Lefebvre (1976/2009) notes, one of the primary pressures facing the nation state 
in the modern world is the relatively autonomous nature of technological and 
economic growth. In this sense, the totemic value of educational technology for 
states should not be overlooked, with governments using educational technology 
agendas as a high-profile means of being seen as actually ‘doing something’ about 
the digital age. 
Il. 
Communitarianism 
In addition to these agendas, a strong strain of counterestablishment thinking also 
underpins many other people’s endorsement of digital technology as a means 
of reorganizing educational provision and practice. Regardless of whether con- 
sciously held, these values reflect the influence of 1960s’ counterculturalism on 
development of digital technology. Indeed, the significance of late 1960s’ Califor- 
nian ‘hippie’ philosophy in informing the beginnings of the home-brew computer 
movement, early programmer communities and, more recently, the notions of 
open-source software and social software has been well documented (Markoff 
2005). As such, progressive and subversive countercultural values and philoso- 
phies have long underpinned the development of computer technology from the 
1960s onwards. As Steven Jones (2006, p. 189) contends, over the past 50 years 
this has seen the steady growth within countercultural movements of a “pro- 
technology faction [who] believed that it was possible to create a new kind of 
counter-technology, an appropriately scaled and designed technology that, come 
the revolution and the collapse of the military-industrial complex, would rise to 
the occasion”. 
The influence of this “wild hippie culture” (Lovink 2011, p. 39) is evident in 
what can be described as the ‘communitarian’ understanding of computer tech- 
nology as a ready means of reimagining and reorganizing all aspects of society and 
culture (including education) by “promot[ing] togetherness through the fostering 
of mutual empathy and understanding” (Curran 2012, p. 38). These views there- 
fore reflect the ‘New Communalist’ strand of the 1960s’ San Francisco coun- 
tercultural movement, which imbued computing with values of “collaboration, 

=== PAGE 50 ===
36 
Understanding Educational Technology as Ideology 
flexibility and utopian social change” (Dean 2010, p. 19). Such thinking led to 
popular reconceptualizations of computing in terms of the progressive values and 
artistic sensibilities of the time. Persuasive arguments have therefore been made 
over time for the development of computer-based communes and ‘global vil- 
lages’, and the framing of computer-based action as a “loose-knit, collaborative 
effort with an open social structure” (Mason 2006, p. 145). 
During the 1960s and 1970s, this computer-based communitarianism was 
largely a political attempt to reposition the computer as a ‘social machine’ rather 
than a ‘war machine’. In this sense, these values reflected the “psychedelic social 
ideas” (Mason 2006, p. 143) of the hippie movement alongside traditions within 
academic science of openness and reciprocity (Curran 2012). Yet communitarian 
ideals have persisted throughout the subsequent development of computer and 
internet technology. Indeed, the use of digital technology to support the re- 
creation of what Jodi Dean (2010, p. 8) describes as “society without antagonism” 
now has a relatively long heritage in technology terms — linking back to the de- 
velopment of the Whole Earth ‘Lectronic Link (or WELL), alongside MUDS, 
MOOs and other forms of ‘virtual community’ in the 1980s and 1990s, to the 
virtual worlds and ‘blogosphere’ of the 2000s and 2010s. The recent trend for Sili- 
con Valley billionaire entrepreneurs to invest their money in the construction of 
real-life offshore island communities and space transportation is therefore a logical 
extension of these values. 
IV. Anti-institutionalism 
The communitarian philosophy frames digital technology as “‘a form of relatively 
slow and benign sabotage — that is, as a means of using human-scale technology to 
resist and gradually undermine the dominant technocracy” (Jones 2006, p. 195). 
in contrast, another strand of countercultural-inspired thinking about digital tech- 
nology and education is more direct in its framing of technology as a means to re- 
sist and oppose establishment interests. This is what Richard Wise (2000) identifies 
as the ‘disruptive’ anti-institutional wing of the computing counterculture — that 
is, those “believ[ing] that cheap computing power in the hands of citizens could 
be a powerful resource for democracy and a weapon against overbearing govern- 
ment and big business” (Wise 2000, p. 26). These ideas celebrate the empower- 
ment of computer-using individuals at the expense of dominant institutions — be 
they military, bureaucratic, corporate or government. The key here is the perceived 
ability of digital technologies to support ‘self-organization’ within networks that 
is decentralized, distributed and bottom-up, therefore opposing the planned and 
controlled nature of institutional organization. Seen along these lines, then the 
facilitation of a “do-it-yourself, self-reliant approach” (Atkinson 2010, p. 79) is an 
inherent outcome of computer use — reflecting “‘a widespread desire for connec- 
tion and cooperation in a context free of the private and public hierarchies that so 
often dominate our lives” (Streeter 1999, p. 60). 

=== PAGE 51 ===
Understanding Educational Technology as Ideology 
37 
These ideas of anti-institutional forms of self-organization have been expressed 
in a number of ways with regard to digital technology and education. For ex- 
ample, educators working in the traditions of ‘critical pedagogy’ and ‘democratic 
education’ have seized upon digital technology as a potential “means for revolu- 
tionary ends” of allowing individuals to transcend the limitations of conventional 
schooling and educational expectations (Suoranta & Vadén 2010, p. 177). Such 
thinking therefore positions digital technology as realizing the critical pedagogic 
philosophy of Paulo Friere and the arguments for the ‘deschooling’ of society by 
the likes of Goodman, Holt, Lister, Kozel, Reimer and, most prominently, Ivan II- 
lich. During the 1960s and early 1970s these writers condemned institutionalized 
learning as inhibiting individual growth due to its function as a product of capital- 
ist society and emphasis on ‘progress’ through mass production and consumption. 
These views are therefore seen as prophetically anticipating contemporary rheto- 
rics of digital technologies and education. As Charles Leadbeater (2008, p. 44) 
reasoned, 
“In 1971 [deschooling] must have sounded mad. In the era of eBay and 
MySpace it sounds like self-evident wisdom”’. 
In these terms, support for individuals’ self-determination of their learning via 
digital technologies feeds into wider enthusiasms shared amongst many in educa- 
tion for the inherent benefits of episodes of informal learning that take place out- 
side the control of formal education organizations and settings (see Sefton-Green 
2004). Digital technology has therefore been aligned readily with arguments for 
the deinstitutionalizing of education (Downes 2010), and the encouragement of 
‘unlearning’ — that is, “learning how to learn independently” (Chokr 2009, p. 6). 
In these terms, digital technology is seen as a potential means of resisting the 
‘banking model’ of accumulating ‘knowledge content’, and instead supporting 
open discussion, open debate, radical questioning, continuous experimentation 
and the sharing of knowledge. 
V. Techno-fundamentalism 
A final core (but often less obvious) value underpinning many people’s interest 
in educational technology is what Vaidhyanathan (2011) describes as a ‘techno- 
fundamentalism’. 
While acknowledged rarely, this can be described as a straight- 
forward enchantment with technology and desire to benefit from continued 
technological progress. As Steven Jones (2006, p. 2) describes, this line of think- 
ing reflects a popular “willingness to buy into two widely shared assumptions: 
i) that technology’s place in our daily lives is central; and ii) that it will inevitably 
increase in the future”. As such the techno-fundamentalist mindset reflects an 
implicit belief that technology offers a means to substantially improve current 
forms of everyday life and social relations — including education. Jodi Dean iden- 
tifies this as a ‘core faith’ throughout many sectors of contemporary society, often 
reflected in a belief that “technology will save the world .. 
. the credo that the 
proper tools make anything possible: the computer thus appears to make anything 

=== PAGE 52 ===
38 
Understanding Educational Technology as Ideology 
possible; the computer thus appears as the universal tool making everything pos- 
sible” (Dean 2010, p. 20). 
One prominent feature of the techno-fundamentalist mindset is a belief in 
what has been termed ‘computationalism’ (see Golumbia 2009; Lanier 2010). 
Computationalism frames the world in terms of adjustable and refinable statistical 
algorithms, thereby offering what Savat (2009, p. 4) describes as “the simplicity 
of increased control offered by Boolean logic and the binary digit”. As such, any 
aspect of society — including education — can be seen in terms of a computational 
problem that can be addressed through computational thinking and logic. From 
this perspective, digital technology offers a ready means to “route around conflict, 
as if working code were the solution to any problem rather than a particular set 
of problems” (Dean 2010, p. 23). 
These beliefs and values are rarely expressed or acknowledged, yet underpin 
many justifications for the use of digital technology in education. A techno- 
fundamentalist perspective certainly underpins the framing of discussions of edu- 
cation and technology in terms of future-orientated belief, speculating on how 
technology ‘can and will’ rather than how technology ‘has and does’ (Njenga & 
Fourie 2010, p. 201). These assumptions are apparent within expectations of even 
the newest of technology users, reflecting the unconscious nature of many people’s 
inherent faith in technological progress and the ‘technical fix’. Indeed, this deep- 
rooted faith in technology could be said to have assumed a quasi-religious status 
within contemporary society. Some authors have pointed toward the ‘awe’ with 
which digital technology is regarded in Western society (Jones 2006), alongside 
the ‘alrnost religious intensity’ that pervades popular discourses around technology 
(Thomas 2011; see also Lewin 2011). For some commentators, then, this ‘infatua- 
tion’ with digital technology has “gain[ed] the aura of a new religion” (Campanelli 
2010, p. 37) in our otherwise increasingly secular times. As Jaron Lanier (2010, 
p. 178) concludes, “Those who enter into the theatre of computationalism are 
given all the mental solace that is usually associated with traditional religions”’. 
Thinking Against the Orthodoxy of 
Education and Technology 
The use of digital technology in education is clearly intertwined with a diversity 
of values, interests and agendas — from a straightforward faith in the transformatory 
‘power’ of technology to matters of global economic competitiveness and organi- 
zational efficiency. As such, educational technology is perhaps best understood as a 
‘culturally contested zone’ where a variety of social groups “create, negotiate, and 
give differing and sometimes conflicting forms, meanings and uses to technolo- 
gies” (Oudshoorn & Pinch 2003, p. 24). What is particularly interesting about the 
umbrella term of ‘educational technology’ is its apparent ability to accommodate 
all these agendas (from the countercultural to the commercial) with little sense 
of incompatibility or conflict. This is an area where different social groups (ftom 

=== PAGE 53 ===
Understanding Educational Technology as Ideology 
39 
corporate interests to critical educators) with different values and interests appear 
to more or less coexist alongside each other, united by their cumulative support 
for the orthodoxy of educational technology. Given this complexity of values and 
interests, it is certainly worth questioning how educational technology appears to 
exist as an uncontroversial and relatively harmonious area of education. 
One obvious conclusion — which shall be explored throughout this book — is 
that this lack of controversy and conflict reflects the underlying ideologically 
driven nature of educational technology. Indeed, the fact that apparent con- 
sensus can arise from such seemingly contradictory interests fits well with the 
messy and compromised nature of sustained ideological dominance. As Freeden 
(2003) reminds us, dominant ideologies need to constantly attract and retain a 
wide range of interests and ‘significant groups’, and rely on the ongoing negotia- 
tion of some sort of compromise. While logical inconsistencies will inevitably 
creep into this process, “ideologies are adept at reconciling such tensions mainly 
because the polysemic manner in which [these ideas are] formulated allows 
for enough interpretative leeway to find an area of logical consistency among 
them” (Preeden 2003, p. 56). Thus while new age spiritualism, sociocultural psy- 
chology, countercultural deinstitutionalization and technocratic notions of new 
managerialism may appear unlikely bedfellows, such sentiments have proved 
to find common ground under the general banner of achieving some sort of 
‘transformation’ and ‘change’ through educational technology. This relates back 
to the observation in Chapter 1 about educational technology being an essen- 
tially ‘positive project’ — that is, involving groups who share a common interest 
in using technology to change or ‘transform’ education along better lines (what- 
ever they might understand ‘better’ to mean). In these terms, one can begin to 
see the ways in which educational technology might be said to have become an 
area dominated by what Friesen (2008, p. 2) terms “ideologically-charged com- 
mon sense”. In other words, it is an area where diverse groups are all working 
to pursue their various visions of a ‘better’ education, while also legitimating 
and supporting a wider range of largely obscured dominant ideological interests. 
The key issue that now needs to be considered ts how the ideological character 
of educational technology is actually taking form ‘on the ground’ and with what 
outcomes. At this early stage of our analysis it is therefore important to maintain 
an open mind about what lies ahead. Of course, implicit in this book’s stated 
mission of ‘distrusting educational technology’ is a suggestion that these domi- 
nant shapings are an unwelcome and ultimately restrictive imposition on educa- 
tion. However, in highlighting the ideological nature of educational technology, 
it should not be assumed that there are no benefits at all associated with current 
forms of educational technology. Indeed, it could be that many of the individual- 
ized, neo-liberal, new capitalist promises of education and technology are justified 
and valid. It could well be that these technologies support meaningful and fulfill- 
ing forms of educational engagement within the conditions of contemporary sO- 
ciety. It could well be that digital technology is successfully allowing the “privilege 

=== PAGE 54 ===
40 
Understanding Educational Technology as Ideology 
and convenience” of education to be provided “without the unsightly mess” of 
state inefficiencies and restrictions (Dean 2002, p. 3). 
Regardless of whether one is prepared to start this analysis with a completely 
open mind, it is certainly sensible to remain circumspect about the realities of 
education and technology. As such, it seems appropriate to conclude this chapter 
with a set of questions that can be carried through the next six chapters. In chal- 
lenging the ideology of education and technology these are some of the main 
issues and questions that are worthy of attention: 
* 
What are the ideological dimensions of educational technology? What mean- 
ings and understandings of education are being conveyed through digital 
technologies? How do these technologies disseminate ideas about political 
and economic structures? What is the language that is being associated with 
education and digital technology? 
¢ 
What forms of educational engagement are being promoted through digital 
technology use, and what forms are being obscured and silenced? In whose 
interests does the common consensus about educational technology work? 
How persuasive does this manipulation of understandings and meanings ap- 
pear to be? 
; 
¢ 
What freedoms and unfreedoms are associated with digital technology use 
in education? How are these being experienced by different individuals and 
social groups? To what extent are educational technologies situated in domi- 
nant structures of production and power? Tg what extent do educational 
technologies disrupt dominant structures of production and power? 
* 
How is technology-based education altering the relationship between the 
individual and the commons, as well as the public and private? Are new 
technologies fostering a sense of obligation and communal sense of educa- 
tion? Are all individuals self-responsibilized and empowered by educational 
technology? 
* 
What are the emotional, ‘human’ outcomes of increased technology use in 
education? In what ways are digital technologies enhancing or diminishing a 
sense of pleasure, engagement and enchantment with education? 
* 
What are the continuities and discontinuities between ‘new’ forms of digital 
education and the forms of education that preceded? In what ways are exist- 
ing practices and processes altered? In what ways are existing structures and 
relations superseded altogether? 
Conclusions 
These questions are a reminder that rather than simply noting the potential links 
between educational technology and dominant ideologies, we also need to ex- 
plore the ‘how’ of these ideologies (Ball 2012). How are these dominant ideologies 
being promoted — if at all — through educational technologies? How are libertar- 
ian, neo-liberal and new capitalist values and dispositions being enacted through 

=== PAGE 55 ===
Understanding Educational Technology as Ideology 
41 
the increased use of technology in education? These questions certainly suggest 
the need to spend time examining the ‘real life’ of various forms of digital tech- 
nology use in education. They also warn against approaching these issues in a 
wholly detached manner. Instead, any critical analysis of education and technol- 
ogy needs to be able to offer a set of alternative counterhegemonic suggestions of 
ways in which more ‘palatable’ future forms of education and technology might 
be secured. 
As such, our pessimistic investigation of education and digital technol- 
ogy is not one that is totally devoid of hope. 
So how, then, to best take these intentions forward? Rather than concentrat- 
ing on specific devices and applications that are being currently valorised and 
celebrated in academic discussions of educational technology (e.g., speculative 
discussions of the educational merits of tablet computers, Twitter or ‘MOOCs’), 
the next four chapters pursue the questions just outlined through detailed analyses 
of four main genres of contemporary educational technology — that is, ‘virtual’, 
‘open’, ‘social’ and ‘games’ technologies. These genres reflect a set of dominant 
cultural logics in recent educational technology thinking, and all have had a last- 
ing influence on the nature and flavour of contemporary educational technology. 
The next four chapters will therefore now go on to explore the ideological nature 
and form of the ‘virtual’, ‘open’, ‘games’ and ‘social’ technologies that are increas- 
ingly being used in education. Most importantly, each chapter will consider the 
fundamental question that has lurked beneath all of our discussions so far — that is, 
to what extent should we be distrustful of the ideological underpinning of these 
technologies? 

=== PAGE 56 ===
3 
DISTRUSTING ‘VIRTUAL’ 
TECHNOLOGIES IN EDUCATION 
Introduction 
While the arguments presented in Chapter 2 make neat theoretical sense, devel- 
oping realistic understandings of the connections between educational techno- 
logy and dominant ideologies requires further work. 
We now need to apply the 
critical concerns and concepts outlined in Chapters 1 and 2 to some tangible 
examples. 
The next four chapters of this book therefore stand against, and explore 
in detail, four prominent genres of digital technology in education — that is, the 
use of ‘virtual’, ‘open’, ‘games’ and ‘social’ technologies. Of course, in differentiat- 
ing between these ‘types’ of digital technology it should be recognised that what 
we are taking to be their distinct characteristics are actually in evidence across 
many different forms of digital education. For example, such is the ongoing con- 
vergence of digital devices and digital practices that most contemporary forms of 
technology could be said to have ‘social’ characteristics. Notions of ‘open’ archi- 
tecture and ‘open’ access are common features of many contemporary forms of 
digital technology. Games and gaming activities are also now incorporated into 
many different types of technology. Perhaps most obviously, any digital technol- 
ogy is by definition ‘virtual’. However, as will be reasoned in each chapter, these 
broad categories can be used as helpful shorthand in identifying specific sets of 
tools, applications and services that lie at the heart of digital technology use in 
contemporary education. Thus while they might appear to be somewhat arbitrary 
distinctions to make, these four genres provide a useful ‘way in’ to exploring and 
better understanding the ideological nature of educational technology. 
We can start this process by examining what can be identified as ‘virtual’ tech- 
nologies. Of course, virtuality has become a widely accepted and rarely com- 
mented upon feature of contemporary digital technology — in contrast to the 

=== PAGE 57 ===
Distrusting ‘Virtual’ Technologies in Education 
43 
novelty of the term during the 1980s and 1990s. Indeed, during these iatter de- 
cades of the twentieth century, authors such as Pierre Levy and William Gibson 
made great play of promoting the notion of the ‘virtual’ as a contemporary buzz- 
word alongside the general excitement for ‘cyberspace’, the ‘information super- 
highway’ and the prefixing of ‘e’ to most areas of economy and society. Nearly 
30 years later, while the social science literature now rarely makes mention of 
concepts such as virtual communities, virtual reality or virtual teams, the con- 
cept of ‘virtual’ technologies nevertheless remains a key part of contemporary 
digital technology use. In particular, this chapter will concentrate on the genre 
of digital technologies that seek to represent, and often replicate, forms of educa- 
tional provision and practice. These range from virtual classes and courses, virtual 
schools and universities to other forms of ‘virtual learning environments’ and 
‘virtual worlds’. While subsequent chapters will go on to explore genres of tech- 
nology that are perhaps considered by technologists to be more innovative and 
‘disruptive’ by contemporary standards, the virtual technologies described in this 
chapter certainly represent some of the most widely implemented and frequently 
encountered forms of digital technology in education. 
As such they are an appro- 
priate set of digital technologies with which to begin our discussion. 
What Are Virtual Technologies? 
Most forms of digital technology rely on the concept of representing and replicat- 
ing more complex physical forms and associated ‘real-life’ practices in a ‘virtual’ 
form. For example, the ubiquitous ‘office’ computer applications of word proces- 
sors, spreadsheets and databases can all be seen as virtual forms of older analogue 
technologies such as typewriters, accounts ledgers and filing cabinets. Indeed, 
computerized technologies tend to be presented to the user in the form of a 
‘virtual machine’ — that is, a simple-to-use, imaginary device that the operating 
system presents as a facade. In the case of a personal computer's virtual ‘desktop’ or 
the user interface of a smartphone, this engineered virtuality is generally so suc- 
cessful that most users do not stop to think that the ‘machine’ they are viewing and 
interacting with is a very simplified virtual version of the actual hardware. In this 
sense, all digital devices rely on the presentation of different forms of simulated 
virtual environment, albeit with varying degrees of realism. In contrast, digital 
technologies can also be used to support highly complex, lifelike representations 
of ‘real-life’ phenomena. 
The 1980s and 1990s, for example, saw much enthusiasm 
for the use of computer hardware and software to create the effect of fully immer- 
sive three-dimensional environments that users could move through and interact 
with. Crucially, these environments created the effect of objects having a three- 
dimensional spatial presence, independent of both the user and the computer 
technology. Thus whereas virtual applications usually require the user to suspend 
his or her disbelief and imagine a virtual environment, ‘virtual reality’ technology 
was seen as distinct in actually creating such environments through human senses 

=== PAGE 58 ===
44 
Distrusting ‘Virtual’ Technologies in Education 
such as sight, sound and touch. Whereas the speculated virtual reality technology 
of the 1990s was never realized fully, the use of digital technologies to sustain 
immersive environments continues in the form of ‘augmented reality’ (i.e., the 
imposition of computer information in real-life environments) and highly realistic 
simulation environments that rely on forms of tangible ‘haptic’ feedback. 
In many ways, then, virtual technologies can be seen as distinct from the mate- 
rial and concrete elements of the physical world. As Rob Shields (2003, p. 2) puts 
it, these are technologies that convey “the nature of activities and objects which 
exist but are not tangible”. In other words, virtual technologies constitute ‘real’ 
forms of action and consequence, albeit in an abstracted form. 
As the ‘reality’ ele- 
ment of virtual reality implies, something is actually happening when one uses 
these technologies. 
Thus, as Shields (2003, p. 25) writes, “the virtual is real but not 
actual”. In this sense, virtual technologies are often seen as supporting wholly dif- 
ferent and distinct environments within which social interactions can take place. 
One of the obvious differences of virtual technologies lies in their support of dis- 
embodied action, “allow[ing] the overcoming of the constraints of embodiment, 
enabling the subject to engage with the world outside of a specific embodied 
location in time and space” (Cooper 2002, p. 7).'Fhis discontinuity between the 
body and location, as well as between the self and others, is therefore seen by 
some commentators to support the reconstitution of social relations. For example, 
Cooper (2002) points to the ‘qualitative shift’ of offering individuals the chance to 
engage with and consume cultural objects outside of the socio-historical locus of 
their production. Similarly, the ability to interact with others regardless of physical 
distance or proximity is seen as having significant implications for the presentation 
of self and the (re)constitution of identity. As Shields (2003, p. 13) puts it, virtual 
technologies can allow “users to imagine leaving behind identities in one realm to 
become something/someone else or to play an entirely different role”. 
These issues notwithstanding, it would be a mistake to assume that virtual 
technologies are completely distinct and differentiated from the concrete actualities 
of the physical world. Indeed, in a prosaic sense it is important not to overlook 
the underpinning material elements of any ‘virtual’ technology. For example, the 
material realities of any form of virtual computing remain rooted in the global 
network of hundreds of thousands of miles of cabling, alongside the huge ware- 
houses of servers in North Carolina, Ireland and other centres of data storage and 
processing around the world. Viewed in these terms, it was estimated that main- 
taining the ‘life’ of each citizen of the popular ‘virtual world’ Second Life involved 
an average annual electricity consumption equivalent to that of a real-life adult 
living in Brazil. While enthusiasts of Second Life may dismiss this as a pedantic 
and trivial point, it highlights the continuities as well as discontinuities between 
the ‘virtual’ and the ‘concrete’ that lie at the heart of any virtual technology. The 
same can also be said for the immediate context of use of these technologies (e.g., 
the bedroom, the classroom or the office), or issues of offline language proficiency 
or socio-economic conditions. Thus, virtual environments might be better classed 

=== PAGE 59 ===
Distrusting ‘Virtual’ Technologies in Education 
45 
as ambiguous ‘liminal’ spaces. In one sense, these are spaces and environments that 
are participated in on a temporary basis, and are distinguished from some notion 
of commonplace ‘everyday life’. Yet these are spaces and environments that are 
also “integrated within existing offline practices and social relationships, rather 
than creating a ‘reality’ that is completely separate and removed from offline life” 
(Song 2010, p. 266). Thus as Rob Shields (2003, p. 79) concludes, virtual technol- 
ogies should be seen as a complex combination of the fantastic and the concrete: 
The digitally virtual is thus embedded in the on-going life of the concrete, 
standing in close relationship as a fantastic escape attempt, a simulation of 
possible events, or a rendering which is used as the basis of decisions on and 
actions in the material world . .. the digitally virtual is an important exten- 
sion of notions of reality and the context of action. 
This correspondence between the concrete and the virtual is reflected in the 
well-established spatial metaphors that are often used to define and structure virtual 
environments. 
As Payal Arora (2012) notes, many of these metaphors position virtual 
environments as ‘utilitarian-driven spaces’ that are of functional and practical use to 
society (the 1990s’ notion of the ‘information superhighway’ being a good example 
of this). Virtual environments are also often described in terms of being ‘context- 
driven spaces’ — oriented towards specific situated and embedded practices. The 
computer ‘desktop’, for example, conveys a clear sense of the type of work that the 
computer can be used for, implying expected forms of organization and manage- 
ment. These spaces are often ‘value-driven’ in nature — that is, based on emotive ele- 
ments through personal association and sentiment (such as the notion of the ‘virtual 
museum’). In contrast, other spaces are described in terms that convey less emphasis 
on functionality and appear to be more open and ‘play-driven’ in nature, such as 
the seemingly endless socially orientated ‘islands’ of the Second Life virtual world. 
As Arora (2012) concludes, tethering virtual spaces to real places in this manner 
serves to shape perceptions and influence user actions — ultimately acting to repli- 
cate pre-existing social structures and forms of organization in virtual form. 
Virtual environments should therefore be seen as aligned closely with real- 
life, concrete spaces and places — sometimes complementing and extending the 
features of physical spaces, and sometimes offering substitutes and alternatives. In 
all cases, however, it could be argued that virtual environments have a number 
of common underpinning features. Till Straube (2012), for example, reasons that 
virtual places can be understood in at least three different ways. Firstly, these are 
technology-mediated environments that have a primarily imagined materiality 
and location — be it in terms of ‘entering’ chat rooms or maintaining documents 
with hierarchies of organized folders. This sense of rootedness in a particular ma- 
teriality and location is enforced by the tendency of many forms of virtual tech- 
nology to convey a sense of technology-mediated ‘telepresence’. This involves 
manipulating the user’s senses to provide a feeling of being present in a setting 

=== PAGE 60 ===
46 
Distrusting ‘Virtual’ Technologies in Education 
other than his or her actual location, and also being able to feel the presence of 
others who are similarly dislocated. Secondly, Straube (2012, n.p.) points to the 
mutual constitution of virtual spaces with physical places — as he puts it, “these 
imaginary qualities are always in reference to real places”. Finally, virtual places 
can be seen as being built around the primacy of social processes and relations 
between the various users (or participants) of the virtual environment. 
As Straube 
(2012, n.p.) concludes, virtual places can therefore be thought of as “reification 
of social relations”. 
The Rise of Educational Interest in Virtual Technologies 
As these descriptions and definitions suggest, virtual technologies are associated 
with a range of possible reconfigurations and realignments of real-life practices and 
processes across a number of different domains. As Brian Massumi (2002, p. 30) 
observes, the virtual is therefore a ‘realm of potential’ which combines the future 
and the past, offers new spaces for existing action and therefore constitutes “a lived 
paradox where what are normally opposites coexist, coalesce, and connect; where 
what cannot be experienced cannot but be felt — albeit reduced and contained”. 
Given this sense of augmentation and improvement, it is understandable that virtual 
technologies have long attracted the attention and enthusiasm of educationalists 
keen to use these technologies as a means of improving and transforming education. 
For example, according to Tiffin and Rajasingham (1995, p. 7), virtual education 
should be seen as having many possibilities to ‘advance the way we learn’: 
[Virtual technology] offers us the possibility ofa class meeting in the Amazon 
Forest or on top of Mount Everest; it could allow us to expand our view- 
point to see the solar system operating like a game of marbles in front of us, 
or shrink it so that we can walk through an atomic structure as though it 
was a sculpture in a park; we could enter a fictional virtual reality in the per- 
sona of a character in a play, or a non-fictional virtual reality to accompany a 
surgeon in an exploration at the micro-level of the human body. 
These sentiments of allowing the learning of ‘anything’ regardless of place, space, 
time or physical constraints runs throughout discussions of the educational poten- 
tial of virtual technologies. Indeed, beyond such abstracted descriptions, educational 
application of virtual environments, simulation and worlds is well established, cen- 
tring around three different types of technology — simulations; virtual classrooms 
and virtual schools; and virtual worlds and virtual learning environments. 
I. Simulations 
Computer simulations can be divided into two broad types: simulations based on 
operational models and those containing conceptual models of real-life phenom- 
ena (De Jong & Van Joolingen 1998). As the term suggests, ‘operational’ simulations 

=== PAGE 61 ===
Distrusting ‘Virtual’ Technologies in Education 
47 
include sequences of tangible cognitive and noncognitive procedures that relate 
directly to the system being simulated. ‘Conceptual’ simulations — such as those 
that offer models of complex processes in economics and physics — are often more 
complex and hold more abstracted principles, concepts and facts related to systems 
being simulated. The use of computer-based operational simulations has a rich 
heritage in education and training. Sophisticated and immersive simulations have 
been developed for a variety of work-related areas of ‘operational’ training — such 
as flight simulators and vehicle simulators. 
The use of computer-based conceptual 
simulations also has a long history in schools and universities, especially in subject 
areas such as science. Here digital technology is used to present dynamic models 
of real-life systems and processes that would be too expensive, dangerous, time- 
consuming or microscopic to experience in real life. The ability of computers to 
repeat these simulations on multiple occasions is seen as allowing for discovery- 
based learning and the refinement of conceptual understandings (Rutten, Van 
Joolingen & Van der Veen 2012), 
Recently, these domains of operational and conceptual simulation have con- 
verged in the form of highly sophisticated immersive simulations. In terms of med- 
ical training, for example, a range of clinical simulations has been developed, from 
computer-controlled mannequins (which are designed to replace the traditional 
use of cadavers) to fully immersive surgical simulation rooms that replicate oper- 
ating theatres and similar clinical settings (see Weller, Nestel, Marshall, Brooks & 
Conn 2012). In the field of military training, increasingly sophisticated battle- 
field and naval war craft simulators have been developed to mimic some of the 
social and cultural elements of war-work as well as operational aspects of combat. 
These technologies are also used to a lesser extent in compulsory education. For 
example, the popularity of interactive whiteboards in schools has seen the devel- 
opment of education-related ‘cave automatic virtual environments’ where data 
projectors are directed on the walls of'a classroom to simulate ‘immersive virtual 
reality environments’. 
These trends continue through the emerging technologies 
of holography, retinal screens and other digital eyewear supporting the access of 
education through virtual studios. 
{I. Virtual Classrooms and Virtual Schools 
Whereas simulation technologies all focus on specific, bounded situations, digital 
technologies are also used to replicate and represent general educational contexts 
and settings. One popular application is the ‘virtual classroom’ — usually a spatial 
representation of a classroom or lecture theatre that can be ‘inhabited’ by learners 
and teachers. Often these virtual spaces will support synchronous forms of ‘live’ 
instruction and feedback, with learners able to listen to lectures and view videos 
and visual presentations, while also interacting with other learners via text and 
voice. Other asynchronous forms of virtual classroom exist in the form of digital 
spaces where resources can be accessed and shared — such as audio recordings 
and text transcripts of lectures, supplementary readings and discussion forums. 

=== PAGE 62 ===
48 
Distrusting ‘Virtual’ Technologies in Education 
Aside from virtual classrooms, digital technology is now used commonly to 
support the provision of formal education outside of the physical and spatial con- 
fines of school and university buildings, while retaining major educational struc- 
tures and processes such as curriculum, assessment and certification. Although 
some proponents of virtual education such as Tiffin and Rajasingham (1995, 
p. 10) suggest using the term ‘virtual learning institute’ to “avoid the idea . 
. 
. [of] 
a virtual version of educational systems as we know them now’, most of these 
technologies replicate the familiar spaces of the school, college and university. This 
has been especially the case with regard to school-based education, with grow- 
ing numbers of internet-based virtual schools now established to offer online 
‘out-of-school’ schooling. One of the first major instances of this was the now 
defunct Hudson-Concord ‘Virtual High School’ programme in the US. Operat- 
ing between 1997 and 2002, this programme was sponsored by $7.4 million of 
federal funding and, at its peak, boasted students from 10 countries. From these 
beginnings the majority of US states now operate online learning programmes 
for children and young people involved in compulsory schooling. Similar op- 
erations continue in the forms of the long-running ‘World Virtual School’ and 
‘Florida Virtual School’ — the latter of which has been funded in part by the Gates 
Foundation and offers instruction on a global basis. While the Florida Virtual School 
is free of charge for residents of Florida, there are also a growing number of elite, 
fee-paying virtual schools, seeking to cater to the children of globally mobile 
families. 
One sustained application of virtual schools has been the establishment of 
online ‘charter schools’ in the US — effectively online versions of independent, 
state-supported schools providing an alternative to traditional public education. 
Online charter schools grew twentyfold during the 2000s, positioning them as 
a significant element of compulsory education provision. 
The majority of states 
in the US now support individual ‘cyber schools’ as well as having district-level 
online programmes where 20 to 80 per cent of a student’s academic instruction 
can be delivered via the internet (Watson, Gemin & Ryan 2008; Ellis 2008). It is 
estimated that nearly a quarter of a million US students are enrolled in full-time 
virtual schools (Miron & Urschel 2012), with over 1 million taking online courses 
alongside their classroom lessons each year (Means, Toyama, Murphy, Bakia & 
Jones 2009). 
These forms of virtual schooling provide online access to conventional school- 
ing that directly replicates the curriculum and culture of traditional ‘bricks and 
mortar’ schools without being delivered in a physical institution. Other forms of 
virtual schooling include complementary or ‘secondary-credit’ provision that adds 
to — rather than replicates — face-to-face schooling. One high-profile example 
was the Australian ‘Virtual School for the Gifted’ programme that operated dur- 
ing the 2000s. This programme used remote online tuition to offer supplemen- 
tary learning opportunities for ‘gifted and talented’ students who were considered 
to be largely unchallenged by their conventional schoolwork. Other prominent 

=== PAGE 63 ===
Distrusting ‘Virtual’ Technologies in Education 
49 
instances of complementary virtual schooling include the provision of online 
supplementary learning resources by a range of public and commercial organi- 
zations. One example of this form of virtual schooling is the British Broadcast- 
ing Corporation’s popular ‘ByteSize’ revision materials, A similar commercially 
provided equivalent is the fast food chain McDonald’s provision of subsidized 
online tutoring programmes to secondary school pupils in Australia (Curtis 2009). 
As with ‘official’ virtual school provision, these programmes offer online means 
of helping students engage with aspects of their schooling without attending a 
physical school. 
Il. Learning in Virtual Worlds 
Whereas these virtual technologies seek to replicate specific educational set- 
tings or forms of teaching and learning, interest is also growing in providing 
educational opportunities through less bounded and more open forms of ‘virtual 
worlds’. 
The notion of virtual worlds came to popularity during the 2000s with 
the rise of applications such as ‘Second Life’. These are online simulated environ- 
ments which present a consistent and persistent modelled ‘world’ within which 
users can interact with each other — most commonly in the third-person form of 
controlling a personalized character (known as an ‘avatar’). These applications are 
usually rendered in three-diniensional form, combining graphics, text, sound and 
gesture, and attracting large numbers of users. At its peak, for example, Second 
Life boasted an average of over 60,000 concurrent users with over 20 million 
registered accounts. Unlike the ‘massively multiplayer online role playing games’ 
these virtual worlds are not underpinned by games mechanics such as rules, points 
scoring, rewards and goals. Instead, these digital applications are designed primar- 
ily to support open-ended social interactions between users. 
The capacity of virtual worlds to offer alternate spaces for interaction prompted 
many educational institutions to experiment with the virtual provision of classes 
and courses through Second Life during the 2000s — especially in the areas of 
college-level and university-level language learning and business subjects. A num- 
ber of educational institutions still run virtual classrooms and educational spaces 
through virtual world applications, and the development of learning provision in 
virtual worlds remains a growth area of educational technology scholarship (Nel- 
son & Erlandson 2012). As Jin (2011) has argued, virtual worlds place an emphasis 
on learning through social interaction and collaboration, as well as through visual 
communication. 
Aside from the use of mainstream virtual worlds such as Second 
Life, a number of virtual environments have been developed specifically for dis- 
tinct educational topics. For example, the European Union-produced ‘Citzalia’ 
virtual world was heralded as “democracy in action ...a role-playing game and 
social networking forum wrapped in a virtual 3D world that captures the essence 
of the European parliament” (Phillips 2010, p. 18). Ambitiously, this application 
was designed to offer a “mash-up of the three European parliament buildings in 

=== PAGE 64 ===
50 
__Distrusting ‘Virtual’ Technologies in Education 
Brussels, Strasbourg and Luxembourg and filled with real MEPs and European 
Commission civil servants’’. In this virtual world, school children and other inter- 
ested parties were supposed to “‘re-enact the process of creating EU legislation” 
and “stimulate discussion about Europe” (Phillips 2010, p. 18). 
IV. Virtual Learning Environments 
These immersive and somewhat exotic applications notwithstanding, perhaps the 
most significant of the virtual technologies used in education are the ‘learning man- 
agement systems’, ‘managed learning systems’ and ‘virtual learning environments’. 
These are applications that seek to replicate the main functions of educational in- 
stitutions in digital form — the provision of learning content and other resources, 
communication between learners, teachers, administrators and (where applicable) 
parents, the submission and assessment of coursework, and the monitoring of learn- 
ing progress. 
The most popular of these applications — in particular the commer- 
cially produced ‘Blackboard’ system and its open-source equivalent, ‘Moodle’ — are 
now used widely through universities, colleges and school systems as a prominent 
means of managing and administrating teaching and learning processes. 
Of late, these virtual technologies (which are concerned specifically with the 
organization of curriculum and pedagogy) have been integrated increasingly with 
digital technologies designed to support the routine processes of data collection, 
record keeping, monitoring and assessment, creation and distribution of learn- 
ing resources, and coordination of students, teachers, parents, school leaders and 
administrators. These technologies include ‘management information systems’ 
that collate record-keeping functions such as payrolls, budgeting and account- 
ing, lesson timetabling, scheduling and planning, as well as the management of 
student attendance, registration and admissions. 
The past 10 years or so have seen 
the increased convergence of these institutional technologies into integrated 
systems — thereby allowing institutionally related data, resources and other ser- 
vices to be accessed and used across the different aspects of a school or university 
organization. 
This has seen the integration of management information systems, 
virtual learning environments and communications technologies into virtual sys- 
tems that are accessible to educational managers, administrators, teachers, students 
and parents. As such, school, college and university use of integrated manage- 
ment and administration-related systems now represents a significant feature of 
the educational technology landscape in many European, North American and 
Australasian contexts. 
Positive Claims and Promises for the Use of Virtual 
Technologies in Education 
While diverse in nature and form, the use of these virtual technologies in con- 
temporary education is associated with a number of commonly perceived benefits 

=== PAGE 65 ===
Distrusting ‘Virtual’ Technologies in Education 
51 
and advantages. For many commentators, these virtual technologies introduce 
increased freedoms to any individual’s engagement with education. A prominent 
argument in this respect is the role of virtual education in increasing choice and 
imposing ‘market accountability’ in the form of competition that drives educa- 
tional providers (both online and offline) to improve as they compete to recruit 
and retain students (Miron & Urschel 2012). As such, forms of virtual schooling 
are often justified as introducing the benefits of market efficiency and competi- 
tion into compulsory school systems. Indeed, virtual schools have tended to be 
developed and run by a variety of providers — from school districts and universities 
to small private companies and large multinational corporations (see Picciano & 
Spring 2013). Growing numbers of commercial companies also act as vendors 
for the delivery of virtual courses and the licensed use of virtual course materials. 
This ‘learning marketplace’ is bolstered by the considerable amount of content de- 
veloped by educators and schools themselves. 
All told, virtual schooling is seen as 
making school systems more diverse and more competitive. 
This reflects what An- 
derson (2009) identified as the ‘long tail’ of digital provision, where purely digital 
products that are of marginal, niche interest can be produced and consumed at no 
additional material loss. 
Besides these system-wide improvements, proponents of virtual forms of edu- 
cation also celebrate the benefits of personalization and flexibility for individual 
learners. For example, it is often argued that virtual schools provide individual- 
ized forms of instruction that better meet the specific needs and learning styles 
of students. Virtual schooling is seen as allowing flexibility in terms of scheduling 
and place, as well as expanding high-quality learning in specific subjects. While 
some students (or their parents) will actively choose virtual schooling, the virtual 
provision of education is also seen as playing a compensatory role for students 
who are unable physically to attend ‘bricks and mortar’ schools. As such virtual 
schooling is justified as a ready alternative for students who have long-term ill- 
ness, who have been excluded from school or for whom schools are considered 
unsuitable. With increasing fears over school safety in the wake of campus shoot- 
ings and other school-related crime, the option of the virtual school has gained 
popularity in urbanized parts of North America. Even when students continue 
to attend face-to-face classes, virtual learning environments are seen as extending 
the provision of the formal educational institution into the home and allow for 
additional learning opportunities outside of the classroom. 
Virtual technologies are also celebrated as providing individual students an 
enhanced freedom from the physical constraints of the ‘real world’. This is often 
expressed in terms of overcoming of barriers of place, space, time and geogra- 
phy, with individuals able to access high-quality educational provision regard- 
less of their local proximity. When using simulations, for instance, students are 
seen as being able to experience otherwise inaccessible locations and experi- 
ences. Similarly, as the producers of the Second Life virtual world boasted, “virtual 
worlds allow teaching to go beyond the classroom, extending learning beyond 

=== PAGE 66 ===
§2 
 Distrusting ‘Virtual’ Technologies in Education 
the limitations traditionally imposed by geography” (cited in Salen 2008, p. 244). 
Additionally, virtual technologies are described as offering individuals an increased 
social and psychological freedom from their real-life circumstances. Enthusiasts 
argue that virtual technologies therefore have profound implications for the ways 
that students and teachers can communicate and interact with each other, with 
people no longer constricted by distance, time or physical attributes like location 
or body. In this sense, it is argued that users will be able to construct diverse ‘vir- 
tual identities’ and digital forms of embodiment through which they can experi- 
ence these ‘virtual’ worlds. 
The key advantage here is that the individual user has 
control over both the environment and the presentation of self. 
These issues all feed into the wider contention that virtual technologies can 
support what Bill Gates once termed ‘friction-free’ interactions and experiences. 
While Gates was talking primarily about the reduced environmental impact of 
virtual rather than material forms of production and consumption, this notion of 
friction-free benefit is often applied in social terms — reflecting “an impression 
of digital space as a radically democratic zone of infinite connectivity” (Murphy 
2012, p. 122). These claims are accompanied by a sense that virtual technolo- 
gies support forms of education that are somehow more efficient than would 
otherwise be the case. Purported benefits of virtual learning environments, for 
example, include the increased ‘engagement’ of students with ‘personalized’ edu- 
cational provision, the ‘democratizing’ of school processes through the flattening 
of traditionally hierarchical relationships, and increased levels of school ‘perfor- 
mance’ and teacher productivity through the ‘open’ sharing of administrative and 
management data (see Selwood & Visscher 2007). 
Arguments Against the Use of Virtual 
Technologies in Education 
As with all forms of educational technology, these virtual technologies have at- 
tracted occasional criticism and unease as their use has increased. For example, 
specific virtual technologies have been criticized in terms of their apparent inef- 
fectiveness in supporting the levels of learning that one might expect from cor- 
responding ‘traditional’ forms of education. In a recent review of the performance 
of virtual schools in the US, Miron and Urschel (2012) pointed to sustained 
evidence of apparently poor performance in comparison to traditional ‘bricks and 
mortar’ school institutions. Focusing on one set of commercially provided virtual 
schools, these authors calculated that just over one quarter of the virtual schools 
had met the expected official targets for ‘Adequate Yearly Progress’ — criteria that 
are usually met by over half of the ‘traditional’ nonvirtual public schools in the 
US. This trend was especially pronounced in terms of reading and mathematics 
attainment. Miron and Urschel (2012) suggested a number of potential reasons 
for these shortfalls, including the fact that the company operating these virtual 
schools devoted considerably fewer resources to instructional salaries and benefits 

=== PAGE 67 ===
Distrusting ‘Virtual’ Technologies in Education 
53 
for employees, as well as having more than three times the number of students- 
per-teacher in comparison to student-teacher ratios in public schools. 
In this manner, questions are raised regularly over the rigour and integrity of 
virtual forms of educational provision. In particular, a number of commentators 
question the threat of virtual technologies to the role of the teacher, not least 
in the tendency of these technologies to involve the total displacement of the 
teacher altogether. For example, the notion of the de-peopled ‘virtual campus’ 
and the idea of schools and universities that are hosted entirely online have obvi- 
ous consequences for the role of the teacher. While not foreseeing the complete 
replacement of the teacher, a number of current debates about education and 
virtual technology imply a substantial reduction in the numbers of teachers and 
other resources required to continue the process of education (see Selwyn 2011). 
While all valid points of discussion, these concerns and criticisms nevertheless 
shy away from challenging some of the more deep-rooted implications of virtual 
technologies in education — not least their implicit reinforcement of the organiza- 
tion of education along individualized neo-liberal lines. Returning to the main 
concerns of Chapters 1 and 2, we now need to consider a number of fundamental 
criticisms of virtual education that centre on the essentially reductionist nature 
of these technologies. 
These issues all cast substantial doubt on the claims of en- 
hanced freedom, choice and diversity made for virtual technologies in education. 
Moreover, they suggest a number of ways in which virtual technologies are linked 
to the dominant ideological interests outlined in Chapter 2. In brief, these con- 
cerns include: the continuities of virtual education with ofHine concrete forms of 
education; the reductive nature of virtual education; and the links between virtual 
education and the deskilling of educational labour. Each of these issues will now 
be considered in further detail. 
|. The Continuities of Virtual Education 
Firstly, it can be argued that the various forms of virtual technology just described 
all tend to replicate (rather than disrupt and alter) offline processes and practices. 
These continuities are perhaps most obvious with virtual forms of educational 
provision. ‘Virtual schools’, ‘virtual universities’, ‘virtual museums’ and the like all 
mark the institutional persistence of their offline equivalents in terms of organiza- 
tion and administration, social relations and culture. Many of these virtual forms 
even involve faithful imagined renderings of the physical architecture and general 
appearance of ‘real-life’ institutions, from the school classroom to the surgical oper- 
ating theatre. Of course, the same is not necessarily the case with the development 
of educational provision in virtual worlds such as Second Life. Yet even in these 
ostensibly ‘free-form’ environments, one continues to find familiar classroom-like 
arrangements with rows of seats and desks, whiteboards and teachers at the front 
of rooms, and all the corresponding tacit conventions one would expect to find in 
a concrete offline classroom. These continuities are also evident in the individual 

=== PAGE 68 ===
54 
Distrusting ‘Virtual’ Technologies in Education 
actions and interactions that are conducted through virtual technologies. Within 
a virtual learning environment or virtual classroom, for example, learners are usu- 
ally positioned much in the same way that they would be in any physical form 
of formal education — that is, as passive consumers of resources and instruction, 
as individuals who are formally assessed, whose attendance is required and whose 
collaboration with other learners is expected to follow the largely artificial con- 
ventions of ‘group work’ and seminar-style discussions that remain ‘on topic’. It 
is telling that within even the most supposedly unconstrained virtual educational 
settings, learners will still often replicate the materialities of off-line learning pro- 
cesses — printing off papers and books, adhering to self-imposed schedules and 
maintaining strict division between curriculum domains of knowledge. As Mc- 
Knight (2012, p. 373) observed of the governance structures that tend to be cho- 
sen by virtual world communities, ““managerialism is the norm”, In this sense, 
virtual education is not so much of an escape from the constraints of traditional 
education structures, routines and conventions as an entrenchment of them. 
That the established traditions and tropes of ‘traditional’ education remain 
largely intact and dominant in the educational use of virtual technologies cer- 
tainly goes against the prevailing rhetoric of freedem and diversity. Indeed, there 
is very little evidence of a prominent ‘long tail’ of esoteric, niche and outré edu- 
cational provision being made available to potential consumers in virtual form. 
Rather, it could be observed that virtual technologies support ‘more of the same’ 
educational provision. As such, virtual technologies appear to be doing little to 
challenge or disrupt what David Tyack and William Tobin (1995, p. 454) refer to 
as the basic ‘grammar’ of formal education — thatis, the combination of material 
artefacts and social relations “designed to instruct, socialize and discipline” learn- 
ers and therefore providing the dominant underpinning “structural framework of 
pedagogical practice” (Brehony 2002, p. 178). This grammar of formal education 
includes the persistent structures and rules that divide time and space, classify stu- 
dents and allocate them to groups, and splinter knowledge into ‘subjects’. Indeed 
it is notable how many of the virtual forms of educational provision outlined 
in this chapter echo the almost subconscious way that rules and approved ‘ways 
of being’ are internalized, adhered to and often reproduced by those who work 
within concrete educational institutions — not least the principles of standardiza- 
tion, order and hierarchization. 
These observations chime with general criticisms that computer-based virtu- 
ality tends towards replication, standardization and homogenization. As Murphy 
(2012, p. 133) reasons, most virtual technologies tend to be immaterial expres- 
sions of material practices and processes — “an intensification of the old” rather 
than the purveyors of anything ‘new’. Critics such as Campanelli (2010, p. 13) 
therefore see virtual technologies as little more than the mirroring of reality in a 
more visible data-driven form — at best leading to “the progressive aestheticiza- 
tion of reality” rather than offering any genuinely alternate arrangements. Thus 
despite the rhetoric of change and opportunity, virtual technologies could be seen 

=== PAGE 69 ===
Distrusting ‘Virtual’ Technologies in Education 
55 
as representing 
“a parallel reality that overlaps and replaces physical reality ... Life 
happens in an unrelenting visibility and — mostly thanks to digital media — in a 
perfect (numeric) transcription” (Campanelli 2010, p. 60). It is important to note 
that this replication and continuity are often evident at an individual as well as in- 
stitutional level. Indeed, some critics have noted how virtual technologies tend to 
preclude a plurality and fluidity of self-presentation and identity formation. Rather, 
it has been observed that when interacting through virtual technologies people 
are generally compelled to be themselves. Thus it could be argued that in many 
virtual environments a tendency remains to be overpresent and ‘overreal’ (i.e., to 
behave and present oneself in ways that reaffirm one’s presence and participation). 
As Lovink (2011, p. 13) concludes, ‘“The idea that the virtual liberates you from 
your old self has collapsed. There is no alternative identity”. 
These points raise a significant challenge to the notion of virtual technologies 
as somehow enhancing individual freedoms. In this sense, people tend to replicate 
rather than deviate from their offline identities when using virtual technologies — 
especially in terms of gender, race and social class — often replicating crude forms 
of ‘cybertype’ that do little to challenge offline norms and stereotypes (Nakamura 
2002). For example, many of the social, cultural and political dimensions of being 
physically disabled are not simply bypassed by learning online (Lewthwaite 2011). 
As Friesen (2008, n.p.) concludes, 
“It is not possible to simply construct an online 
identity or persona ex nihilo or from scratch”. Thus the ability of virtual technolo- 
gies to alter or overcome the offline restrictions and conventions of identity can 
therefore be challenged seriously. Indeed, faced with a virtual indeterminacy it 
would appear that people often tend to revert to what they know. Thus ina virtual 
world such as Second Life, 
[A]ble to do or create anything (there aren’t even laws of gravity), the majority 
of users end up with avatars that are sexier versions of themselves walk- 
ing around shopping, gambling, fixing up their houses, and trying to meet 
people (““meet” can be read euphemistically here). Jt’s not only boring — it’s 
stifling as it confronts users with their lack of skills and imagination .. 
. The 
paradox: cyberspace is not virtual enough. 
(Dean 2010, p. 7) 
Thus in contrast to the transformatory claims outlined at the beginning of this 
chapter, the realities of virtual technology use in education need to be understood 
in terms of continuity with the traditional, offline, concrete forms of education 
that both preceded and continue alongside them. Woolgar’s (2002) mantra of ‘the 
more virtual the more real’ is certainly relevant here — reminding us that engage- 
ment in virtual activities usually stimulates more engagement with the ‘real-life’ 
activities that they replicate. For example, the ‘convenience’ of virtual teleworking 
usually is associated in practice with more physical travelling in the ‘real’ world. It 
may therefore make more sense to see virtuality — as Jordan (1999) suggested — as 

=== PAGE 70 ===
56 
Distrusting ‘Virtual’ Technologies in Education 
the reinvention of familiar physical realities and spaces in digital online settings, 
rather than any radical break with what went before. 
Il. The Restrictions of Virtual Education 
Of course this is not to claim that virtual technologies support exactly the same 
types of education as their offline concrete forms. Instead, all of the forms of vir- 
tual education outlined in this chapter can be seen as reduced, simplified versions 
of what are complex educational processes and practices. However, this distilla- 
tion is not necessarily for the better. For example, the clean lines of the virtual 
classroom and virtual school omit a wealth of detail that otherwise gives character, 
vitality and meaning to a real-life ‘messy’ classroom. Virtual learning environments 
often offer abstracted icon-based representations of the core activities of learn- 
ing and teaching, omitting all manner of informal and tacit processes and prac- 
tices. Any computer-based simulation, however sophisticated, can appear lacking 
in emotional depth and ‘dead-eyed’ when set against the realities of the setting it 
seeks to simulate. In short, it could be argued that virtual technologies tend to 
offer abstracted, decontextualized and ultimately diminished replications of edu- 
cational processes and practices. As Alexander Galloway (2012, p. 78) asks of virtual 
technologies, 
“Are some things unrepresentable?” 
At its heart, then, any form of virtual education needs to be understood as a 
simulation of a physical, concrete form of education, with all of the reductions 
and restrictions that simulation entails. Indeed, Edward Castronova (2006) pro- 
posed the description of ‘synthetic’ rather than ‘virtual’ as a means of acknowl- 
edging the essentially replicated form of virtual worlds and virtual environments. 
Although these technologies do combine impressive amounts of audio, gestural 
and haptic information, they are largely visual in nature — offering what Castells 
(1996) terms ‘symbolic environments’ that are based predominantly around the 
image. In this sense, virtual technologies could be seen as presenting necessarily 
abbreviated and simplified versions of the complex processes and practices that 
they seek to represent and simulate. Brian Massumi (2002), for example, dismisses 
the forms of virtuality supported by digital technologies as artificial ‘sweeping 
gestures’ that bypass the sensations, movement and affect of the processes that they 
seek to replicate while systematizing the possible number of predefined outcomes. 
Other critics have described these technologies as presenting a ‘simulacrum’ of an 
object (Murphy 2012), undermined by their tendency to reduce complexity to 
the level of “something already known” (Krapp 2011, p. 2). 
In this sense, virtual technologies could be said to involve a number of limi- 
tations, restrictions and omissions. Firstly, virtual technologies often appear to 
present unrealistically straightforward and unproblematic versions of educational 
processes and practices. As Bauman (2010, p. 15) observes, “The main attraction 
of the virtual world derives from the absence of the contradictions and cross- 
purposes that haunt offline life”. Virtual technologies could also be said to present 

=== PAGE 71 ===
Distrusting ‘Virtual’ Technologies in Education 
57 
users with limited forms of choice and action. 
As Campanelli (2010, p. 92) notes, 
despite the ‘founding myth’ of interactivity, virtual technologies are capable at 
best only of offering the user an “infinite number of finite options”. All these 
technologies — from the most sophisticated immersive simulation to the most 
expansive virtual world — are predicated upon designer-created hierarchies of 
‘choice’. 
The restricted, ‘scripted’ nature of any virtual technology is therefore in- 
fluenced by how application developers and designers have configured the tech- 
nology for the imagined ‘ideal’ users. As Campanelli (2010, p. 94) writes, this can 
leave a virtual technology as a frustratingly ‘castrated form’ for all but the most 
unremarkable of users: 
Designers impose a one-size-fits-all model upon what is, in fact, a chaotic 
mass of non-aggregated users. The search for formal standardization and the 
effort towards the homogenization of interfaces have produced ‘castrating 
forms’, which bridle the individual’s creativity as they interact with differ- 
ent interfaces. 
No matter how efficient the navigation, where is the pleasure 
in visiting websites that look like each other and that work in the same 
predictable way? 
Seen in this light, it could be argued that virtual technologies tend to support 
enclosed rather than open forms of action, thereby positioning individuals into 
“pre-defined relationships and structures, which are reproduced and reinforced 
through even the most trivial statements and actions” (Friesen 2008, p. 10). This 
is often evident in the way in which virtual learning environments position indi- 
viduals in a role of ‘the student’ (producing work, being assessed and monitored) 
or ‘the tutor’ (providing resources, grading assignments, monitoring participa- 
tion). These roles and the ‘scripts’ that are associated with them tend to be laden 
with unequal distributions of power and control. As Friesen (2008, p. 10) writes, 
once ‘positioned’ in these roles, “individual identity is to some extent defined 
by them”. 
All these issues therefore highlight the generally abstracted and decontextual- 
ized nature of engaging with education through virtual technologies. In this sense, 
parallels can be drawn between virtual spaces and Marc Augé’s (1995) notion of 
the ‘nonplace’ — that is, places of transience that do not hold enough significance 
to be regarded as real-life, sustained, meaningful ‘places’. Auge focused on loca- 
tions such as the airport terminal, supermarket, hotel room and motorway as 
some of the primary nonplaces of modern times, yet the argument could be made 
for the virtual educational spaces described earlier as having similar transient, 
decontextualized characteristics. Here, then, all individuals (be they learners or 
teachers) are assumed to be ‘average’, divested of their real identities and back- 
grounds, on the assumption that their needs can be catered to through a process 
of mass customization. Whereas these virtual spaces may claim connections with 
concrete equivalents in the offline world, they are not integrated with the history 

=== PAGE 72 ===
58 
Distrusting ‘Virtual’ Technologies in Education 
of these predecessor places but simply seek to appropriate their memory. As such, 
many of the virtual forms reviewed in this chapter could be seen as little more 
than educational encounters with the (old) life sucked out of them. It is of little 
surprise, therefore, that these are abstractions of existing educational forms that 
more often than not descend into ‘banal utopias, clichés’ (Augé 1995, p. 95). 
Ill, The Reduction of Education Along Data-driven Lines 
A significant element of this reduction of education to its core constituent ele- 
ments is the recasting of ‘virtual’ education along more business-orientated “data- 
driven’ lines. This, of course, is not a unique characteristic of digital education. 
Most contemporary educational systems are now seen as being based around the 
creation and use of data that support the organization of relations through commu- 
nication and information. For example, many forms of formal education are pre- 
dicted around well-established systems of self-evaluation, development planning 
and performance. Schools, for instance, are largely predicated upon data-driven 
processes of internal school management, teachers’ performance management, 
target setting and pupil tracking. 
The intentions of this amplification of data-work 
within the organization and management of education are deliberate — not least the 
intentional move towards what Jenny Ozga terms ‘governing education through 
data’ and the shift from centralized governance to individual self-regulation: 
Data production and management were and are essential to the new gov- 
ernance turn; constant comparison is its symbolic feature, as well as a dis- 
tinctive mode of operation .. 
. The shift to governance is, in fact, heavily 
dependent on knowledge and information, which play a pivotal role both 
in the pervasiveness of governance and in allowing the development of its 
dispersed, distributed and disaggregated form. 
(Ozga 2009, p. 150) 
Of key interest here is the obvious role of technologies such as virtual learning 
environments as systems underlying this production and management of edu- 
cational data. For example, in terms of supporting a data-driven ‘audit culture’, 
many of the virtual technologies described in this chapter (with their emphasis 
on the digital capture, manipulation and representation of data) could be seen as 
key elements of the “active surveillance of people through the documents and 
databases they produce” (Apple 2010b, p. 179).'This links the use of virtual educa- 
tional technologies with a range of wider concerns relating to surveillance — most 
notably Foucauldian concepts of governmentality and disciplinary power. Here, 
then, the panoptic qualities of digital technologies such as databases raise a range 
of issues relating to the self-conduct (or, in Foucauldian terms, ‘techniques of the 
self”) of individual subjects, who regulate their behaviour according to interna- 
lized social norms. 

=== PAGE 73 ===
Distrusting ‘Virtual’ Technologies in Education 
59 
Above all, it could be argued that the entrepreneurial rhetoric of a ‘bottom-up’ 
individualized empowerment and/or freeing-up of individual action is not readily 
apparent in the ways in which many of the virtual technologies described in this 
chapter tend to be used. Their emancipatory potential notwithstanding, these are 
often manifest as systems that are built around what Foucault terms a ‘cellular 
individualization’, involving the observation of a mass of individuals, the subse- 
quent hierarchization and judgements made about these individuals and — most 
notably — the construction of ‘administrative identities’ of individuals as an ‘effec- 
tive’ teacher, student and so on. 
As such, the disciplinary character of these digital 
technologies is apparent throughout the use of these technologies — with these 
systems supporting what Hoffman (2010) identifies as the aim of maximizing the 
utility as well as the docility of individual bodies. Indeed, there are a number of 
ways in which virtual technologies could be said to make individuals accountable 
for their actions — particularly in terms of placing teachers and learners under a 
managerial and bureaucratic accountability tu the demands of higher authorities. 
As such these technologies cannot be seen as heralding any notable emergence of 
‘posthierarchical relationships’ (Zuboff 1988) or interactions that are especially ‘in- 
teractive’ in the usual sense of the word — that is, where “the viewer has the power 
to be an active participant in the unfolding of [the] flow of [an] event, influencing 
or modifying its form” (Lovejoy 2004, p. 167). 
At best, the interactivity of virtual 
learning environments and their like is best described as involving top-down im- 
positions and “false modes of active engagement” (Fuery 2008, p. 33). 
This is illustrated in the use of many of these virtual technologies to extend 
the ‘politics of representation’ within educational institutions — not least in terms 
of the consequences of how individuals (re)present themselves online, coupled 
with what is also recorded about that individual by others online (Fuery 2008). 
For example, one of the main functions of virtual learning environments is to 
collate and intensify personal data into publicly accessible profiles. These profiles 
often have the disempowering effect of displacing people as knowing subjects, and 
reducing education to a set of digitally based “textually-mediated work processes” 
(Daniel 2008, p. 253). This leads to virtual learning systems allowing for the im- 
plicit (if not explicit) forms of ‘predictive surveillance’ where data relating to past 
performance and behaviour is readily available to inform expectations of future 
behaviours (see Knox 2010). Crucial here are the ways in which these data 
are connected, aggregated and applied in ways not before possible. For example, 
teachers’ and students’ online profiles are often used as a crucial element of the ad- 
ministrative identity of being an ‘effective’ or ‘deviant’ teacher or student — labels 
that are constructed “‘on the basis of knowledge obtained through observation” 
(Hoffman 2010, p. 37) rather than direct experiences. 
This ‘dataveillance’ functions 
to decrease the influence of ‘human’ experience and judgement, with it no longer 
seeming to matter what a teacher may personally know about a student in the 
face of his or her ‘dashboard’ profile and aggregated tally of positive and negative 
‘events’, As such, there would seem to be little room for ‘professional’ expertise 

=== PAGE 74 ===
60 
Distrusting ‘Virtual’ Technologies in Education 
or interpersonal emotion when faced with such data. In these terms, institutional 
technologies could be said to be both dehumanizing and deprofessionalizing the 
relationships between people in an educational context — be they students, teach- 
ers, administrators or managers. 
These latter points highlight the extent to which these technologies exclude 
a range of qualities from the processes and practices of education. In this respect, 
it could also be reasoned that what is not represented and known within systems 
of surveillance is equally as important as what is highlighted and recorded (Apple 
2010a). 
The silences of virtual technology systems could be said to be the more 
‘difficult’ aspects of teachers’ and students’ lives, such as professionalism, emotions, 
effort and interpersonal relationships. 
These issues have little or no space to fea- 
ture in what is being observed and monitored when abstracted forms of virtual 
education are being engaged in. In this way, the operation of virtual learning 
environments renders what would usually be considered to be important aspects 
of educational relations as unimportant or invisible. For example, in terms of the 
interpersonal relationships between students and teachers or between groups of 
teachers, it could be argued that online relationships and interactions take the 
form of a ‘contrived collegiality’ involving coerced collaboration amongst teach- 
ers, managers and administrators (see Grieshaber 2010). These are not spontane- 
ous forms of collaborative collegiality, but interactions between teachers that are 
coerced, administratively regulated and orientated around the implementation of 
predetermined outcomes. 
IV. Virtual Education and the Deskilling of Educational Labour 
Many of these reductive features, it could be argued, relate to the essentially dis- 
embodied nature of the teaching and learning process as represented through 
virtual technologies. All of the technologies outlined in this chapter rely on 
virtual interactions in lieu of face-to-face commitment and embodied inter- 
action. At best, then, these virtual technologies reconstruct the categories of 
‘student’ and ‘tutor’ with few of the usual visual or material cues. For example, 
whereas many virtual technologies seek to replicate a sense of copresence, this 
does not equate with the total corporeal experience of the real-life classroom. 
As implied earlier, many commentators celebrate this ‘freeing-up’ of interac- 
tion from the synchronous, embodied forms of face-to-face communication as 
leading to briefer, multiple forms of encounter. In the eyes of some educational 
authorities, this diminished role of the teacher is a desirable change — primarily 
because teachers have ‘insufficient understanding’ of business needs, and be- 
cause their present role hinders “internal searches for efficiency” (Levidow 
2005, p. 159). 
Alongside this disembodiment of teaching and learning, however, is the po- 
tential reduction of the role of 
the teacher to that of 
initial provider of 
instruc- 
tion, and the student to that of consumer. As Les Levidow (2005, p. 158) writes, 

=== PAGE 75 ===
Distrusting ‘Virtual’ Technologies in Education 
61 
The technology can be designed to discipline, deskill and/or displace 
teachers’ labour. This approach changes the role of students, who become 
consumers of instructional commodities. Student-teacher relationships are 
reified as relationships between consumers and providers of things. This 
marginalizes any learning partnership between them as people. 
Some commentators have therefore pointed to a number of limiting char- 
acteristics that the digital ‘automation’ of education along these lines infers. For 
instance, the virtual provision of courses may well make good ‘business-sense’ for 
educational institutions eager to reach wider markets of students, but it can have 
a number of destabilizing implications for the professional status of the teacher. 
Once a course has been delivered online for the first time, a teacher has little or 
no intellectual property rights over the future use of that material. Indeed, it is 
not unknown in higher education settings for academic labour to be outsourced 
to lower-paid, lower-qualified staff once materials have been captured in vir- 
tual form. As was noted earlier, a teacher’s virtual work is made more visible 
and therefore more easily monitored and ‘assessed’ by their employers. Overall 
it could be argued that virtual technologies contribute to an ‘erosion of aca- 
demic freedom’ (Petrina 2005), and hasten the transformation of university edu- 
cation into what David Noble (2002) characterized unfavourably as a ‘digital 
diploma mill’. 
Many of these concerns therefore centre on the role of digital technology in 
rationalizing and standardizing the job of being a teacher, and therefore contrib- 
uting to the separation of the ‘conception’ of teaching from the ‘execution’ of 
teaching. While this fragmentation of the teaching process may make technical 
sense, it can have significant consequences for the teacher. As Apple and Jungck 
(1990, p. 230) have observed with regard to computers and the school curriculum, 
When complicated jobs are broken down into atomistic elements, the per- 
son doing the job loses sight of the whole process and loses control over her 
or his own labour because someone outside the immediate situation now 
has greater control over both the planning and what is actually to go on. 
While many of these arguments were made in an era of ‘stand-alone’ comput- 
ers, much of this ‘deskilling’ analysis holds true in the present context of virtual 
learning environments, digital portfolios and shared learning resources. Through 
these virtual technologies, it could be argued, the work of educators is being 
restructured in ways that reduce their autonomy, independence and control 
over their work. Moreover, these technologies can be seen as placing workplace 
knowledge and control into the hands of administrators and managers. This, David 
Noble (2002, p. 33) concludes, “robs faculty of their knowledge and skills, their 
control over their working lives, the product of their labour, and, ultimately, their 
means of livelihood”. Of course, these criticisms of digital education are rooted in 

=== PAGE 76 ===
62. 
_Distrusting ‘Virtual’ Technologies in Education 
previous criticisms of the increased automation of factories and production lines 
during the twentieth century. For example, in his analysis of the deskilling of fac- 
tory workers, Harry Braverman (1974) noted how seemingly ‘helpful’ technologies 
were used to enhance ways of controlling the workforce. As such, it is important 
to remember that workplace technologies have long been used to eliminate the 
need for direct supervision of workers, with management controlling workers by 
either automating work, or breaking down jobs into fragmented work processes 
that require little conceptual ability. So too in education, virtual technologies such 
as the ‘virtual learning environment’ or the ‘virtual school’ system can be argued to 
depend on the deskilling of teachers and their students, engendering a ‘tool’ men- 
tality towards the mechanisms of teaching and learning (Monahan 2005). 
Conclusions 
This chapter has gathered together a diverse set of arguments in contrast to the 
assumptions of freedom, control and choice that are usually associated with virtual 
technologies in education. In many ways, these counterarguments raise a com- 
mon concern with the ways in which virtual technologies remain connected 
to — rather than separate from — the ‘real-life’ contexts of education, especially in 
terms of control of education by dominant interests. While virtual technologies 
can be imagined as functioning as systems for a more democratic, freer, univer- 
sally accessible form of education, they can also be seen in contrary terms — as a 
“symbol of control; trails of information, security networks, and so on” (Murphy 
2012, p. 138). In particular, as has been suggested throughout this chapter, these 
virtual technologies could be seen as placing education firmly in the midst of the 
immaterial ‘new’ economy — standardizing and commoditizing education, reduc- 
ing educational processes and relationships to forms that are easily quantifiable 
and recorded, distancing educational professionals from the process of educational 
engagement and thereby deprofessionalizing and deskilling the teaching profes- 
sion. All these concerns suggest that virtual technologies act as powerful determi- 
nants of human action, in ways similar to the built environments and structures 
that they replicate. These concerns also highlight the need to better recognise the 
correspondences that persist between digital technology and the real-life social, 
cultural, economic and political contexts of education. Only through heightened 
awareness of these connections and correspondences can the full nature of virtual 
education be understood. As Ben Agger (2004, p. 109) reasons, 
Virtuality is neither to be celebrated nor condemned without thinking the- 
oretically, dialectically, about the interaction between the pace and space of 
social life, on the one hand, and our technologies, on the other. 
These are complex issues, yet it is now time to refocus our attention towards 
other genres of educational technology. Having spent this chapter considering 

=== PAGE 77 ===
Distrusting ‘Virtual’ Technologies in Education 
63 
some of the most prevalent and well-established digital forms being used in con- 
temporary education, it is time to focus on an emerging ‘type’ of educational 
technology — the much feted area of ‘open’ technologies. These technologies — 
including open-source software, open access courses and open educational 
resources — also promise much in the way of disrupting established patterns of 
power and control in education, and challenging dominant elite interests. Indeed, 
as will soon be discussed, these open technologies are seen by many educational- 
ists and technologists as a potential ‘game changer’ in terms of transforming con- 
temporary education. So what, then, do open technologies offer to education, and 
why should be we distrustful of these seemingly benign developments? 

=== PAGE 78 ===
A 
DISTRUSTING ‘OPEN’ 
TECHNOLOGIES IN EDUCATION 
Introduction 
‘Open’ technologies have risen to prominence over the past 10 years, not only 
within the software programming communities where the concept of ‘open- 
source’ originated but also amongst nontechnology communities, such as art- 
ists, authors, scientists, scholars and political activists. From alternative cola drinks 
(such as ‘Open Cola’) to automobiles (such as the ‘C,mm,n’ open-source car), 
the notion of opening up production processes to a mass of user/innovators is 
seen as chiming with broader contemporary concerns, particularly in terms of 
the changing nature of expertise, ownership and governance. As Lawrence Lessig 
(2002, p. 9) observes, digital technology is seen as an integral element of this 
contemporary ‘free culture’, thereby allowing “a whole generation to create [and] 
share that creativity with others”. 
The ‘open’ philosophy has certainly been welcomed by technology enthusi- 
asts eager to explore ways of disrupting the dominant concerns of commercial 
IT production. Open principles and practices are seen as supporting the user- 
driven production of devices and software which are more efficiently, expertly 
and elegantly designed. Although gaining in significance across many areas of 
society, open-source software has found particular support of late from sections 
of the educational technology community which have long bemoaned the lack 
of ‘fit’ between commercially produced IT products and the needs of students 
and teachers. Indeed, the educational potential of open-source software has been 
portrayed as overcoming many of the issues at the heart of the enduring patterns 
of ineffectual use of digital technologies within educational institutions. As such, 
it is argued that open software and digital content offer “new approaches to teach- 
ing and learning, specifically enabling personalized learning and enhanced learner 

=== PAGE 79 ===
Distrusting ‘Open’ Technologies in Education 
65 
voice; enabling knowledge sharing and collaboration between teachers; overcom- 
ing structural divides between developers of educational software and its users” 
(Bacon & Dillon 2006, p. 7). Thus, for many educational and noneducational au- 
thors alike, open-source software has assumed “an aura of unstoppability” (Shirky 
1999), with some privileging it as “an extension of what we regard as best practice 
in [education]” (Carmichael & Honour 2002, p. 4). 
While not denying the undoubted utility and overall significance of open- 
source software for computer programmers and software developers, this chapter 
contends that current struggles and debates over future form(s) of educational 
technology require a more measured understanding of the sociopolitical nature of 
‘open’ production. Indeed, much of the educational debate can be criticized for 
positioning ‘open’ principles as a benign, ‘neutral’ force for good and, therefore, 
failing to account for embedded structures and processes of power, authority and 
governance. If such issues are not considered fully, then it could well be that open 
products and practices work in ways that actually restrict the more equitable and 
empowering development of technology use in education. With such concerns 
in mind, this chapter offers a critical rejoinder to the growing reification of the 
‘open’ philosophy within educational circles. In particular it highlights the ideo- 
logical agendas which underpin much of the current enthusiasm for the adoption 
of all things ‘open’ in education and thereby obscure the likely limitations and 
unintended consequences of their implementation in educational settings. 
Unpacking the Key Features and Underlying 
Philosophies of ‘Open’ Technologies 
What is now understood popularly as ‘open-source’ software derives from a suc- 
cession of prominent projects within programming communities from the 1980s 
onwards. Indeed, much of the impetus for ‘open’ products, practices and prin- 
ciples stemmed from a resistance to the increasing dominance of ‘proprietary’ 
commercial software production and a corresponding desire to re-establish the 
experimental, grass-roots ideals of computer programming, which originated in 
early mainframe computing in the 1950s and 1960s (see Levy 1984). Richard 
Stallman’s free software version of the UNIX operating system (known as ‘GNU’s 
Not Unix’) is acknowledged as one of the first significant manifestations of open- 
source principles, prompting the subsequent formation of the free software move- 
ment in the 1980s. Stallman’s Free Software Foundation was predicated upon the 
notion that software should be available to all users free of charge and, crucially, 
free of restrictions on further development and distribution. In emphasising the 
need for accessible source code (crucially through the counterproprietary no- 
tion of ‘copyleft’ as opposed to copyright) Stallman’s model moved beyond the 
notion of gratis software and sought to prevent future closed-source versions of 
any piece of software. These stipulations all embodied the moral underpinnings 
of the ‘hacker ethic’ that frames information sharing as a positive moral good, and 

=== PAGE 80 ===
66 
 Distrusting ‘Open’ Technologies in Education 
positions programmers as bound ethically to share their coding at all times (see 
Levy 1984; Himanen 2001). 
During the 1990s, author/activists such as Bruce Perens and Eric Raymond 
did much to popularise a more business-driven notion of open-source software 
inspired by the rise of Linus Tordveld’s celebrated ‘Linux’ operating system. In 
particular, Raymond’s (1998a) influential treatise “The Cathedral and the Bazaar’ 
made a powerful case for the inefficiencies of a closed, top-down, hierarchal mode 
of software production (i.e., the ‘cathedral’, where production is overseen by an 
elite group of abbots and abbesses) when compared to the efficiency and elegance 
of mass, non-proprietary modes of production (i.e., the ‘bazaar’, where many pro- 
ducers coalesce in a free-for-all market situation). These arguments were bolstered 
by the ‘Open Source Definition’ proposed by Perens in 1998, which classified 
open-source as software that is distributed with its source code for no more than 
the cost of distribution. Moreover, Perens suggested that any user/innovator should 
then be free to redistribute modified versions of the software under the same terms 
without royalties or licensing fees to the author. This philosophy has since been ex- 
tended throughout the 2000s and 2010s into the notion of ‘creative commons’ — 
a series of copyright licenses that ensure the right to distribute work at no charge, 
either in an unchanged verbatim form, or in an altered, derivative form. 
While the free software and open-source initiatives remain distinct in their 
compulsion to distribute software free of charge and involvement of commercial 
organizations, these two sets of practices and protocols have tended to be referred 
to in conflated terms as ‘open’. Thus in most debates the notion of ‘open’ has 
come to denote any digital content with accessible source code which is publicly 
distributed on noncommercial lines, non-proprietary and open to amendment 
and (re)development. This is often described in terms of a digitally based ‘gift 
economy’, where “property is freely given away, there is no accumulation, no 
money or other medium of exchange, and no exchange value” (Fuchs 2008, 
p. 162). This philosophy of ‘openness’ is seen as altering fundamentally the mode 
of production and consumption, towards a model of commons-based peer pro- 
duction of social and public goods (Benkler 2006). Some authors have talked 
of processes of ‘produsage’ and ‘prosuming’, based around decentralized decision 
making, individual autonomy in peer production, and the creation of resources 
that are held collectively by a community that permits sharing of the resources 
created amongst its members and often beyond the community (Meng & Wu 
2013). This sees the encouragement of processes of sharing, such as peer-to-peer 
collaboration and cocreation — all enabled through ‘new architectures of partici- 
pation’ associated with digital technologies (Peters & Roberts 2011). 
Educational Interest in ‘Open’ Products and Practices 
This philosophy of the open development of digital technologies has found a 
ready home in education, which has a long history of ‘open’ education provision 

=== PAGE 81 ===
Distrusting ‘Open’ Technologies in Education 
67 
and practice. Indeed, the current enthusiasms for the use of ‘open’ digital tech- 
nologies for education and learning can be traced back to the ‘open education’ 
movement and its support for the provision of distance education with no barriers 
to access — not least the establishment in the 1960s of the UK Open University, 
Canada’s Athabasca University and subsequent counterparts around the world. 
Now the notion of technology-supported ‘open’ forms of educational provision 
and practice take at least three distinct forms. 
I. Open-source Software 
Open-source software and the principles and practices of its production have 
proved highly attractive to a range of interest groups and actors within education. 
Indeed, open-source software now commands a prominent place within contem- 
porary computing culture, with most major genres of commercial software mir- 
rored by high-quality open-source applications which have been developed and 
adopted by open-source communities. Current mainstream open-source pack- 
ages include the aforementioned Linux operating system, the Android operating 
system for mobile devices, the Ubuntu suite of desktop applications, the Firefox 
web browser, the OpenOffice suite of ‘Office’ applications and the Apache web 
server. Alongside these general applications are a range of education-specific 
tools and programmes. In college and university institutions across the world, the 
Moodle online content management package was developed as an open course 
alternative to commercial ‘virtual learning environments’ such as BlackBoard. 
Moreover, a range of ‘niche’ educational products are now growing in use in 
educational settings. Educational open-source communities have thrived through 
forums such as Schoolforge, FLOSS Posse and FLOSSWorld. Alongside these 
communities, a range of specific educational open-source products are now used 
in schools — from the Crocodile Clips physics package to OpenEuclide’s geom- 
etry software. 
The widespread use of open-source software in educational settings is cele- 
brated as a powerful means of circumventing the constraining ‘proprietary lock-in’ 
and dependency on major IT suppliers that many educational institutions oth- 
erwise experience (Carmichael & Honour 2002). Countries such as Brazil, for 
example, are aiming to use open-source software to bring computer access to the 
large proportion of its population who are currently without. As the coordina- 
tor of the Brazilian Free Software Project argued, “Every license for Office plus 
Windows in Brazil — a country in which 22 million people are starving — means 
we have to export sixty sacks of soya beans” (Marcelo Branco, cited in Ander- 
son 2009, p. 105). Similarly, the ‘Deer Leap’ school computerization program in 
Georgia during the 2000s introduced the mandatory use of the Linux operating 
system throughout the national school system. As Chris Anderson (2009, p. 105) 
concludes, “From this perspective, free software is not just good for consumers, it 
is good for the nation”. 

=== PAGE 82 ===
68 
Distrusting ‘Open’ Technologies in Education 
Il. Open Educational Resources 
Alongside the development and use of educationally specific open-source soft- 
ware are the production and use of open educational content. One prominent 
instance of this is the push for ‘open courseware’ and ‘open educational resources’ 
within higher education, concerned with making higher educational materials 
available online for no cost. The term ‘open educational resource’ was introduced 
in 2002 via a series of UNESCO seminars and publications, promoting what 
was described as “the open provision of educational resources, enabled by infor- 
mation and communication technologies, for consultation, use and adaptation 
by a community of users for non-commercial purposes” (D’Antoni 2006, n.p.). 
The open educational resource (OER) movement supports free access to in- 
formation in the form of web-based digital resources for learning, teaching and 
research. These resources are usually placed in the public domain at no cost for 
free use or repurposing by others, and can range from full courses to individual 
lessons or sessions. As the Cape Town Open Education Declaration (2007, n.p.) 
stated, 
This emerging open education movement combines the established tradi- 
tion of sharing good ideas with fellow educators and the collaborative, in- 
teractive culture of the internet. It is built on the belief that everyone should 
have the freedom to use, customize, improve and redistribute educational 
resources without constraint. 
; 
The use of open resources is now a significant element of university education. 
Since the introduction of its commitment to ‘open courseware’ in 2001, it is reck- 
oned that content from almost 80 per cent of courses at the Massachusetts Insti- 
tute of Technology are available in this free-to-use manner. Similar commitments 
can be found in institutions ranging from world-class universities such as Oxford 
and Yale to local community colleges. In all these cases, course materials such as 
seminar notes, podcasts and videos of lectures are shared online to public users. 
The emphasis of open educational resources is not simply to allow teach- 
ers and learners to use materials as provided but also to encourage users to alter 
and add to these resources as required. 
The UK Open University’s ‘OpenLearn’ 
project provides free access to all of the institution’s curriculum materials with 
an invitation for teachers and learners to adapt these resources as they see fit. 
Other ventures rely on educational content that is created by individuals as well 
as institutions. For example, the “YouTube.Edw’ service concentrates on provid- 
ing educational videos produced by individuals and institutions alike. As Swain 
(2009, p. 7) enthuses, “Thousands of hours of material are online for potential 
students, or educators looking for inspiration”. Enthusiasm is increasing for the 
use of open educational resources that are concerned with making educational 
materials available and reconfigurable online for no cost. There are now many 

=== PAGE 83 ===
Distrusting ‘Open’ Technologies in Education 
69 
examples of these open educational arrangements — from large professional re- 
positories to volunteers from China and Taiwan translating open-source materi- 
als from North American and European universities into Mandarin Chinese. In 
all these instances, high-quality teaching and learning are no longer seen as the 
domain of closed educational institutions and professional communities. 
Ill, Open Courses and Delivery of Education 
This ethos has been carried forward into the provision of open courses and the 
open delivery of sustained educational programmes. There has been growing 
interest in established educational institutions offering free online courses and 
instruction. Early examples of this included the ‘AllLearn’ consortium of Ox- 
ford, Yale and Stanford Universities offering over 100 online enrichment courses, 
followed by Stanford University’s ‘Introduction to Artificial Intelligence’ open 
course and the $60 million ‘edX’ programme run by Harvard and MIT, offering 
certified university-level courses. Similar consortia of established universities have 
been established to offer online, free access to adjunct educational provisions — 
such as the ‘OER University’ backed by Athabasca, South Queensland and Otaga 
Polytechnic — where students can follow courses for free, and pay reduced fees 
for formal assessment and credit applicable for recognised qualification from these 
institutions. On a more ad hoc basis, there are a growing number of ‘massively 
open online courses’ (MOOCs) being run by academics and faculty around the 
world. These MOOCs use a combination of online content management systems, 
group forums and other content sharing software to facilitate online courses for 
large numbers of dispersed students — often involving online lectures from invited 
faculty and experts, accompanied by readings and discussions. 
Some instances of this open, communal approach involve communities of edu- 
cators and technologists in developed countries adopting open-source methods to 
provide education to more disadvantaged learners. 
The ‘International University 
of the People’ is one such example — a not-for-profit volunteer university offer- 
ing courses provided entirely online and largely free of charge. The university is 
designed around altruistic social networking principles. Groups of students par- 
ticipate in weekly discussion forums where they can access lecture transcripts and 
associated reading material prepared by volunteer professors (often moonlighting 
from their ‘official’ paid university positions elsewhere). Students are also provided 
with assignments and discussion questions, which then direct their study for the 
week. Students are expected to contribute to discussions and comment on their 
peers’ ideas. For broader discussions and learning, a university-wide forum of all 
the university’s teaching faculty and students operates to aid the discussion and 
clarification of points not covered in the weekly ‘classes’. As well as seeking to ex- 
pand higher education access to social groups who would otherwise be excluded, 
the International University of the People also offers some fundamental concep- 
tual challenges to traditional forms of university education. 

=== PAGE 84 ===
70 
Distrusting ‘Open’ Technologies in Education 
Whereas the International University of the People could be characterized as 
a ‘pro-poor’ solution, other collaborative open programmes in developing coun- 
tries have framed disadvantaged users as ‘active producers and innovators’ (Heeks 
2008). One such project was the Open Knowledge Network that ran during 
the 2000s in countries such as Kenya, Tanzania, Mali, Uganda, Senegal, Zim- 
babwe and Mozambique. The Open Knowledge Network was promoted as “a 
human network, which collects, shares and disseminates local knowledge and is 
supported by flexible technical solutions” (WSIS 2005, n.p.). As Richard Heeks 
(2008, p. 28) describes, the Open Knowledge Network sought to collect, share 
and disseminate “relevant local data content focused on livelihood-appropriate is- 
sues such as health, education, agriculture, and rights”. These projects were usually 
community-based, with individuals often developing content and information 
offline, and then using the internet mobile phones and other communication 
technologies to share with other users. One of the obvious advantages of this 
user-created content was its relevance and usefulness — not least because content 
could be produced in a variety of national and local languages. 
Support for the Use of Open Technologies and 
Techniques in Education 
The growing use of open technologies in education has been accompanied by 
numerous justifications and perceived benefits. For many proponents, the edu- 
cational significance of open products and practices spans far beyond the notion 
of users consuming free, non-proprietary software packages in a passive manner. 
Indeed, the perceived collective efficiency of communal content creation and re- 
distribution has helped the notion of ‘openness’ gain credence both as a technical 
process and as a guiding wider philosophy of empowerment and public good (Von 
Hippel 2005; May 2006). In particular, open-source and open access movements 
have prompted a burgeoning belief amongst educational technologists that teach- 
ers and students are themselves capable of reshaping digital technology around 
their own needs and demands. Much is now being made of the capacity of local, 
‘bespoke’ open software and content production to offer “greater choice and con- 
trol” for educational users (Waring & Maddocks 2005, p. 415), as well as provid- 
ing opportunities for “customizing to fulfil specific educational needs and for 
the development of collaborative on-line learning communities” (Carmichael & 
Honour 2002, p. 47). Instead of altering their practice to fit around the con- 
strained forms of computing offered by ‘off-the-shelf’ commercial software pack- 
ages, it is argued that teachers and students are more than capable of assuming 
control of the means of technological production and developing educational 
technologies for themselves via open products and practices. As Hamilton and 
Feenberg (2005, p. 117) contend, “There is now wide latitude for faculty inter- 
vention and participation in shaping the terms on which [digital technology] will 

=== PAGE 85 ===
Distrusting ‘Open’ Technologies in Education 
71 
impact the academic labour process, the division of academic labour, and owner- 
ship of intellectual resources”. 
In this sense we are currently witnessing a period of considerable enthusiasm 
for the increased flexibility and control that ‘open’ principles are believed to offer 
educational users. This is particularly the case with regards to the potential for 
collaborative creation in the direct shaping of applications and content being 
used in educational settings. Some of this enthusiasm conveys an almost revo- 
lutionary zeal, with the widespread use of open products in educational settings 
anticipated as a ready means of challenging the influence of major IT suppliers 
on educational institutions (Carmichael & Honour 2002). In this way, as Van de 
Bunt-Kokhuis (2004, p. 269) enthused, open products and practices “might serve 
to democratize [education] and allow greater grassroots input”. Moreover, given 
the long-established legacy of shared responsibility within education, as well as 
cultures of peer review and regular revision of knowledge in the light of expe- 
rience, such arguments often portray education to be an especially conducive 
setting within which the ‘open’ ethos can thrive. This has even prompted some 
authors to argue for the mandated use of open products in educational institutions 
whereby governments force schools and colleges to adopt open alternatives to 
commercially available products (Comino & Manenti 2005). As such the notion 
of ‘openness’ has moved beyond being a matter of technical interest for program- 
ming and coding communities to become a prominent and persuasive part of 
wider debates concerning the future shape and forms of educational provision. 
In particular, a frequently voiced set of justifications for ‘open’ forms of digital 
technology is framed around the efficient, creative and even elegant process of 
content production. The open-source ‘bazaar’ is often portrayed as a highly effi- 
cient model of innovation, benefiting from ongoing voluntary labour rather than 
the finite development of a marketable product. It is argued that the “high level of 
peer review” (Waring & Maddocks 2005, p. 415) associated with open processes 
allows far greater numbers of users to scrutinise and refine content than would 
be viable within the economic limitations of commercial production. Moreover, 
open practices are also seen as reinstating the craft-like qualities of software and 
content development, encouraging “ardent (if quirky) programmers, capable of 
brilliant, unorthodox feats of machine manipulation” as opposed to the mundane 
graft of the commercial progranimer (Nissenbaum 2004, p. 196). Thus there is 
a sense that the ‘open’ development of technology allows individual program- 
mers and technologists to regain an importance and prestige within the process 
of production. This reification of the empowered individual is often expressed 
in decidedly anticorporate terms (Bezroukov 1999), with open-source software 
celebrated explicitly by some authors as ‘smacking down’ transnational IT’ cor- 
porations (Kirkpatrick 2004, p. 92). All these arguments feed into a seductive 
positioning of “engineers as ‘elite’ actors in a society where social boundaries are 
drawn primarily in terms of technical expertise” (Lancashire 2001, n.p). 

=== PAGE 86 ===
72 
Distrusting ‘Open’ Technologies in Education 
Above and beyond issues of programmer efficiency and prestige, the open 
philosophy is also associated closely with a powerful sense of increased equity. For 
some proponents, these sentiments are based on the simple premise that “shar- 
ing is better than not sharing” (Streeter 2003, p. 658), thus evoking values of 
trust, generosity, openness and recourse to a gift-economy model of collaboration. 
Much of the support for open technologies in education therefore reflects an idea 
of making education fairer — not least increasing social justice and equalities of 
opportunity. For many supporters, open-source, open content and open delivery 
technologies are portrayed in explicitly emancipatory terms. Some commentators 
associate these technologies with the removal of ‘unfreedoms’ (Atkins, Brown & 
Hammond 2007, p. 1) and ensuring “the provision of access to learning oppor- 
tunities to those who would not otherwise be able to obtain them’ (Downes 
2010, n.p). In this manner, the moral imperative behind the open educational 
resource movement is described by many proponents simply as follows: “Mak- 
ing educational resources freely available to all is a fundamental right” (Conole 
201 2a, p. 2). Indeed, the original UNESCO description of the notion of open 
educational resources framed the movement in decidedly liberal transformatory 
terms, expressing the “wish to develop together a.universal educational resource 
available for the whole of humanity ...they hope that this open resource for the 
future mobilizes the whole of the worldwide community of educators” (cited 
in D’Antoni 2008, p. 7). These sentiments can also be found within the rhetoric 
celebrating the widening of technical expertise and power to the mass of nonex- 
pert computer users. As Lankshear and Knobel (2007, p. 18) enthuse, open-source 
user/innovators “needn’t be experts and most of them are not”. 
While these notions of gift culture, craft and democratization of expertise 
may appear idealistic, they all point to a more nuanced association of open prod- 
ucts, practices and processes with wider sociopolitical reform — not least the no- 
tion of the ‘open’ exemplifying a fundamentally new postmaterialist mode of 
industrial organization (Lancashire 2001). This more politicized alignment of 
openness with a reconfigured economic order is articulated usually in one of two 
(conflicting) forms. From one perspective, openness has come to act as a talisman 
for a set of explicit concerns about ‘new forms’ of property, ‘hybrid ownership’ 
and “asserting indigenous people’s rights to knowledge and resources” (Amin & 
Thrift 2005, p. 233). In particular, the apparent flattening of hierarchies of 
production implicit within ‘open’ principles appeals to long-standing social- 
ist concerns over achieving collective ownership of the means of production, 
a return to handicraft and even the reinstatement of the all-round craftworker. 
For some Left-leaning advocates, therefore, the notion of ‘open’ taps directly 
into socialist ideals of collaboration and worker-ownership leading to ‘better’ 
outcomes. Richard Sennett (2008), amongst others, has argued passionately for 
the open-source philosophy as a ready means of imaginatively crafting ‘better’ 
products while also reskilling otherwise deskilled workers by devolving control 
of the means of production. As Coleman (2004, p. 512) concludes somewhat 

=== PAGE 87 ===
Distrusting ‘Open’ Technologies in Education 
73 
wryly, “Leftist .. 
. activists adore [the open-source model] for its subversive, anti- 
capitalist potentialities”. 
Conversely open software and content has also attracted the support of a 
neo-liberal and ultralibertarian lobby of predominantly North American com- 
mentators, drawn to the individual rather than collective benefits of decoupling 
technology production from the ‘interference’ of overarching central organiza- 
tions. In this sense, open-source software has been enrolled into the wider neo- 
liberal ‘declaration of independence’ often foisted onto new media and technology 
by those on the Right (Fischer 2006). This sense of independence is most often 
predicated around utilitarian (rather than romantic) notions of individualism and 
individual gain. Thus the principles of open production are seen as corresponding 
with neo-liberal views of the desirability of a weak state and diminished public 
intervention as well as the desirability of citizens to make an individual effort 
and an individual success of themselves (see March & Olsen 1995). In this sense, 
open production has been aligned with declarations of ‘freedom’, ‘our American 
liberal heritage’, ‘mistrust of centralized authority’ and opposition to the ‘dry, bu- 
reaucratic detail’ that typifies centrally controlled processes (Streeter 2003; Cole- 
man 2004; Nissenbaum 2004). This emancipation from the top-down strictures 
of state, monopolistic corporations 
and other institutions is seen as fostering a 
powerful form of individually driven creativity, “not imposed by a transcendent 
instance from above [but] where itinerant following and group creation prevail 
over the issuing and obeying of commands” (Harper 2009, p. 136). 
A final set of values that underpins current support for educational use of 
open products draws upon the ways in which individuals work, and therefore, 
learn together during the production and use of open content. As already de- 
scribed, the ongoing development of open products is seen as operating along 
communal, collaborative lines, with solutions arising from the distributed in- 
telligence and expertise of participants within communities of users (Kogut & 
Metiu 2001). Furthermore, it is assumed that individuals who contribute support 
and advice will themselves learn through the help-giving process (Lakhani & 
Von Hippel 2003). Thus in educational terms, open artefacts and resources have 
become something of an icon for the qualities of openness, collaboration, mas- 
tery and apprenticeship that are seen by many to lie at the heart of ‘effective’ 
learning. Seely-Brown and Adler (2008, p. 32) talk of open educational resources 
in terms of a new form of learner-driven learning, “creating the conditions for 
the emergence of new kinds of open participatory learning ecosystems that will 
support active, passion-based learning: Learning 2.0”. In particular, these quali- 
ties are presented by some in the learning sciences and educational technology 
as embodying constructivist and constructionist beliefs concerning sociocultural 
knowledge building. Thus obvious parallels have been drawn with various forms 
of collaborative, learner-centred approaches to education, general enthusiasm for 
peer review and scaffolding of learning and, from an educational technology per- 
spective, a long-standing constructionist belief in children as programmers (see 

=== PAGE 88 ===
74 
Distrusting ‘Open’ Technologies in Education 
Papert 1980). Indeed, open principles are argued by some educationalists to be of 
core relevance “to our understanding of how people learn and produce knowl- 
edge; of how communities collaborate and work to solve problems; and of how 
innovative practices emerge” (Bacon & Dillon 2006, p. 49). As Grainne Conole 
(2012b, p. 2) concludes, 
The key characteristics of these new technologies, such as peer critiquing, 
collective aggregation, personalization, networking and more open prac- 
tices, generally sit well alongside what constitutes good pedagogy and more 
learning- and learner-centred approaches such as inquiry-based learning, 
scenario-based learning, dialogic and reflective learning, and more con- 
structivist and situated pedagogies generally. 
Problematizing the Use of Open-source Software in Education 
At first glance, the case for the use of open technologies in education appears 
difficult to challenge. Indeed, aside from opposition from commercial competi- 
tors wary of the market interference of freely shared products, there has been 
remarkably little popular criticism of open forms of educational technology. Be- 
sides occasional criticism of the veneer of self-righteousness that can pervade 
discussions of open products and practices, they remain widely welcomed and 
promoted within discussions of educational technology. Of course, this is not to 
argue that these technologies are beyond critique. While open production has 
proved appealing to a disparate range of interest groups in education, we must be 
wary of the ideological motivations and political agendas underlying many of the 
more ‘lavish claims’ accompanying the rise of ‘open’ philosophies and principles 
(Weber 2000). 
In this sense, some of the recent educational endorsements of open products 
and practices clearly follow a well-worn tendency for the romanticizing of any 
‘new’ digital development. Indeed, within the general realm of technology devel- 
opment open production and open access has been presented in emotive, evan- 
gelical but ultimately hollow terms of ‘revolution’ (DiBona, Ockman & Stone 
1999), ‘crusade’ (Williams 2002) and even ‘magic’ (Raymond 1998b). 
Yet it would 
be foolish to dismiss the current promotion of openness within educational circles 
as merely another instance of new technology ‘boosterism’ and hyperbole. 
As just 
outlined, ‘open’ philosophies are being championed within the context of edu- 
cation by a broad amalgam of interest groups seeking to reorientate the social 
relations of education in a variety of (often conflicting) ways. This support ranges 
from self-serving communities of technologists and programmers, and neo- 
liberals pursuing a de-schooling agenda, to “disillusioned lefties who have found 
in the rhetorical activism of [open technology] a new and less troublesome kind 
of politics” (Harkin 2007, p. 33). This cacophony of wider ideological agendas be- 
lies the apparently straightforward case for the implementation of open products 

=== PAGE 89 ===
Distrusting ‘Open’ Technologies in Education 
75 
and practices in educational settings. Thus any widespread adoption of open tech- 
nologies is a matter not only of technical adjustment but also of profound social, 
cultural and political importance for future forms of education and, as such, is not 
a process to be entered into lightly. Moreover, as we shall now go on to argue, the 
current ideologically driven and partisan nature of the debate serves to obscure 
a number of compelling reasons to suggest that a reliance on open products and 
practices in education may be as problematic (and only partially as effective) as 
the current reliance on proprietary products, whatever ideological lens one may 
choose to view it through. 
While often well intentioned, it could be argued that the prevailing discourses 
currently framing open principles within the education community fail to ac- 
knowledge and account for the limited and structured nature of the ‘open’ process 
of production. In many ways such misrepresentation of technology is to be ex- 
pected. As Mansell (2004, p. 97) notes, it is natural for those seeking to introduce 
new media into social settings to “concentrate on promoting access with little 
regard for the associated structures and processes of power that are embedded 
within them’’. 
Yet the educational misrepresentation of open products and prac- 
tices is not borne solely from technological overexuberance. Instead much of the 
current enthusiasm for openness is (un)consciously yoked to wider ideological 
motivations of re-engineering and reorientating the social relations of educational 
technologies and educational institutions. As such, the educational application of 
open-source software and open content “beholds a complex political life despite 
the lack of political intention” (Coleman 2004, p. 507), which is currently voiced 
rarely in debates over future forms of education and technology. As such, it is 
important to challenge the ongoing debate concerning openness. With this inten- 
tion in mind, we now go on to present a brief critical analysis of the supposed 
benefits of open production and open access for educational and noneducational 
users alike. 
|. The Tensions Between Individual Competition and 
‘Communal’ Production 
A first obvious disjuncture between the rhetoric and realities of open produc- 
tion in education is the received wisdom that individual user/innovators make 
contributions to open projects for altruistic reasons related to the public good of 
the endeavour. From the empirical research conducted to date on the processes of 
open-source software development it would appear that the motivations of those 
involved in open projects are many — from artistic compulsions to create elegant 
and beautiful work and opposition to large commercial interests to the less dis- 
cussed, ego-driven desire to be seen as a good programmer. This latter motivation 
has been identified by researchers as being perhaps the most significant, given its 
link to underlying driving motivations of career and financial benefit. As Weber 
(2000, p. 21) explains, 

=== PAGE 90 ===
76 
Distrusting ‘Open’ Technologies in Education 
Ego gratification is important because it stems from peer recognition. Peer 
recognition is important because it creates a reputation. A reputation as a 
great programmer is monetizable — in the form of job offers, privileged ac- 
cess to venture capital, etc. 
In their investigation of the development of the Apache and Perl applications, for 
example, Lerner and Tirole (2002) describe how individuals participated in open- 
source projects only if they expected to derive a net benefit from doing so. Matters of 
reputation enhancement were seen by ‘community’ members not necessarily as ends 
in themselves, but as powerful means to signal individual technical expertise which 
could later be leveraged to gain privileged (and usually paid) employment. 
Thus in 
contrast to the prevailing rhetoric of communal altruism, open production can be 
seen as an individualistic and self-centred pursuit, with little obligation to contribute 
above and beyond issues of personal gain. Indeed, open projects cannot be assumed 
to have a de facto collective workshop mentality. Many of the forms of open innova- 
tion described in this chapter could alternatively be characterized as largely indi- 
vidualized pursuits rather than the collective cooperation and collaboration that one 
would find within the configuration of a traditional workshop. As Sennett (2012) 
observes, the social relations and rituals that characterize a workshop are usually not 
replicated in open ‘collectives’. In this sense, the sustainability and collective benefit 
of open ‘solutions’ are questionable as “the majority of participants leave the com- 
munity once their needs are met” (Shah 2006, p. 1000). 
Il. Power Imbalances Within Open Processes of Production 
The notion of open production as a harmoniously inclusive and even nonhier- 
archical process is also problematic. Indeed, popular portrayals of open-source 
software and open content within education are based upon the notion that pro- 
duction takes place within democratic cooperatives based on the “collaborative 
efforts and outcomes of a large number of people working incrementally on a 
problem or artefact without being organized on either a market-based, manage- 
rial or hierarchical model” (Bacon & Dillon 2006, p. 13). Thus one of the central 
tenets of open technologies is that any individual can contribute and therefore 
benefit from the production process. As Schoonmaker (2012, p. 508) reasons, 
For example, in large scale peer production projects like the Linux kernel, 
a kind of ‘meritocratic hierarchy’ exists .. 
. Authority in such a hierarchy 
is based upon the respect that peer producers hold for a leader’s contribu- 
tions, as well as on the leader’s powers of persuasion. Since large-scale peer 
production projects involve interdependent contributions from individuals, 
these projects are organized to make it possible for individuals to contrib- 
ute in a wide range of ways, such as coding, writing documentation, and 

=== PAGE 91 ===
Distrusting ‘Open’ Technologies in Education 
77 
translation. Individuals with diverse abilities, levels of training, commitment, 
or availability can thus all participate in the project. 
Instead, the realities of open production projects could be said to be based 
more in rigid hierarchies of privileged and authorized elites of charismatic leaders 
and core users who oversee and moderate the creative process. For example, it is 
acknowledged widely that tight ownership and coordination are prerequisites to 
any successful open-source software project, not least because “an effective open 
source project takes a lot of work” (O’Reilly 2007). In particular open production 
communities tend to be organized tightly along the lines of experience and ex- 
pertise (Berdou 2008). In practice, then, open production tends to be not simply a 
‘bottom-up’ or flattened collective action but a highly coordinated process based 
around seniority rules, leadership and constraining working practices and rules, 
as well as sanctioning mechanisms such as shunning and ‘flaming’ (Weber 2000; 
Mansell 2006). As Bergquist and Ljungberg (2001, p. 315) observe, the ‘pure’ ef- 
ficiency of open-source software is compromised by “power relationships that are 
expressed as an elitism of the inner circle and exercised as the right to hinder a 
person in contributing to the common good”. 
In this sense there is a reluctance throughout much of educational literature to 
acknowledge that the inclusiveness of open production is tempered by the levels 
of skill required to participate, just as the production and reproduction of open 
resources require a similarly high level of professional confidence and aptitude. 
Although it is often claimed that “user/developers come from all walks of life” 
(Weber 2000, p. 15), meaningful participation is limited clearly to technically 
skilled individuals, whether hobbyists, committed hackers or full-time program- 
mers. In contrast to the ‘pro-am’ free-for-all envisaged by some commentators, 
communities of open content developers tend instead to be sustained and repro- 
duced over time through the gradual integration of technically proficient new 
members who are able to progressively construct identities as ‘software craftsmen’ 
via specific programming ‘rites of passage’ (Ducheneaut 2005). Successful partici- 
pants therefore tend to be those who understand the political nature of software 
development and progressively enrol a network of similarly skilled allies to support 
their efforts. It would seem naively optimistic to imagine the open production 
of software and other content taking place within heterogeneous communities 
of experts and nonexperts sharing common interests and goals. Indeed, unequal 
relations of power are not made explicit, or even acknowledged, in most discus- 
sions of open technologies (Mansell 2004), and if so, are usually explained away 
as being a necessary and productive aspect. As Meng and Wu (2013, p. 128) argue, 
Conflicts and hierarchies are rife within these communities as elsewhere, 
illustrating the dynamics of power relationships within peer production 
communities. [However] in these communities, power is often understood 

=== PAGE 92 ===
78 
Distrusting ‘Open’ Technologies in Education 
to operate as a generative rather than a repressive force that sustains peer 
production at both the organizational and discursive levels. 
Ill. The Mass Consumption of Openly Produced Products 
This notion of unequal participation and power in the peer production of open 
technologies highlights the discrepancy between elite production and mass con- 
sumption of these products and practices. As Bacon and Dillon (2006, p. 49) posit, 
a key challenge underlying the educational success of open software and open 
content is the extent to which “learners and teachers want to, or are able to, be- 
come involved in co-creating digital resources”’. It could therefore be argued that 
only a minority of educators are ever likely to have the requisite resources and 
interest to engage with open products above the level of merely using products as 
cursory end users. This lack of engagement with the dynamic coconstruction of 
open-source products and content was highlighted in Ellen Helsper’s review of 
open software adoption in UK higher education institutions. Here it was found 
that while use of open platforms and software in higher education was relatively 
high, the involvement of universities and colleges.in the modification or cocon- 
struction of these products was remarkably low. It appears that most educational 
users turn to open products for economic reasons of saving money in relation to 
purchasing propriety software (Helsper 2006). 
While understandable, this lack of engagement in the productive processes 
marks a significant diminishment of the supposed benefits of open products, as 
according to the principles of open production and access, the advantages to be 
accrued from the coconstruction of effective products require a mass participa- 
tion in innovation. 
Yet without the sustained, active involvement of a critical 
mass of educational contributors it is increasingly likely that open production 
processes will reposition rather than overcome the existing hegemony of the pro- 
duction of educational content, products and services. As Fischer (2006, p. 141) 
contends, “The question is, therefore, who will manipulate? Everyone, as a naive 
communications democracy utopia would have it? Or the most powerful? Will 
[open-source software] be the empire of virtue ... or the empire of force?” 
It could therefore be argued that open production is most likely to lead to a 
two-track system of a minority of involved ‘innovator-users’ and a majority of 
uninvolved users. In other words, while all members of the educational commu- 
nity may benefit to some extent from the consumption of ‘open’ products, those 
with more technological capital look set to benefit on a far greater scale than 
those with less technological capital. At best, a turn to open content within edu- 
cational settings will shift the nexus of power and control away from commercial 
actors and towards an elite of educational technology actors located within and 
around educational settings. It is highly unlikely that there will be a noticeable 
empowerment of a mass of ‘ordinary’ teachers and students. Indeed, given the 
integral role that “computer programmers and expert consultants” inhabit within 

=== PAGE 93 ===
Distrusting ‘Open’ Technologies in Education 
79 
the development of open-source software (Fischer 2006, p. 130), a widespread 
turn within education towards open products may well lead simply to exagger- 
ated inequality between an empowered educational technology community and 
their rather less empowered mass of nonexpert colleagues. 
The concern therefore 
emerges that for the majority of teachers and learners this will facilitate a compa- 
rably ‘closed-source’ mode of educational technology use as before. Even whether 
such a ‘producer (re)capture’ by educational technologists at the expense of com- 
mercial firms would result in noticeably better forms of educational technology 
use in the classroom is a moot point. 
IV. The Limited Outcomes of Open Production Processes 
This contrast between elite production and mass consumption also raises the issue 
of the restricted nature of the applications and content that are produced. As has 
already been argued, the focus of open production projects is seen as limited only 
by what individual contributors consider to be ‘interesting’ and/or ‘important’ 
problems, rather than being constrained to issues of commercial importance. 
This 
is celebrated as imbuing open products with an unconstrained flexibility, as experts 
“will tend to focus on an immediate 
and tangible problem (the ‘itch’) — a problem 
that they themselves want to solve” (Weber 2000, p. 35). Yet this apparent freedom 
to be guided only by practical interest, intellectual challenge or perceived impor- 
tance of the topic lends obvious limitations to the open production process — most 
notably in areas where there is little expert interest (or ‘software love’ as Shirky 
[1999] described it in programming terms). In the production of open-source 
software, for example, the problems that many programmers would perceive to be 
important or interesting are predicated upon variations of the ‘hacker ethic’ and 
consequent desire to produce ‘antiproprietary’ projects for which strong, relatively 
low-cost commercial alternatives already exist. Consequently, other marginal 
(or less stimulating) projects are unlikely to be pursued — resulting in a situation 
where “certain useful programs don’t get written” (Johnson 2002, p. 637). As 
Shirky (1999, n.p.) concludes, 
Existing software which is old or broken but has to be updated or fixed 
won’t clear the ‘interesting problem’ hurdle. Boring software won’t acquire 
enough beta testers. Projects which require treating the user like aii idiot (an 
oxymoron in the open source world, since scratching a personal itch turns 
the lead developer into User#1) won’t attract enough developers to take 
off. The overlapping categories of old, broken, boring and disdainful of the 
user’s intelligence currently describe a majority of the world’s software, an 
installed base that isn’t going away any time soon. 
In terms of the production of educational content, it is therefore questionable 
whether open production will result in a plethora of obscure and niche content 

=== PAGE 94 ===
80 
Distrusting ‘Open’ Technologies in Education 
in the vein of a rich ‘long tail’ of minority educational products and services. 
To 
date, open educational products and practices have tended to reflect the interests 
and backgrounds of those educators involved in their establishment — hence the 
proliferation of courses and content concerned with computer studies, business 
studies, learning sciences, educational technology and so on. As Jeremy Knox 
(2012) has argued, such limitations of production and consumption are evident 
in the emphasis of open educational resources on individual self-direction, au- 
tonomy and the simplistic assumption of ‘passion-based learning’. 
V. Open Production as a Site of 
Exploitation and Commodification 
All of these issues point to the fact that open products are party to many of 
the limitations of other educational commodities — that is, “‘as abstracted, in- 
tellectual value-in-motion that is to be consumed” (Hall & Hall 2010, n.p.). 
It is therefore misleading to view open peer production as a wholly altruistic, 
gift-giving, noncompetitive and noncommodified process. Clearly ‘cooperation’ 
within open production communities takes place under a competitive logic 
between individuals, with exchanges taking place on the basis of personal gain 
as well as eventual collective benefit. As such, open production could be de- 
scribed as “an entanglement of gifts within the commodity form” (Fuchs 
2008, p. 171-172). Alternately, as Mansell and Berdou (2010) describe it, open 
production is a ‘mixed economy’ in which features of the exchange economy 
come to the fore more often than features of the gift economy. Although not 
being produced by proprietary interests for direct economic gain, open educa- 
tional resources and other open educational technologies could still be said to 
be driven by “an agenda of consumption, marketization and commodification” 
(Hall & Hall 2010, n.p.). 
Indeed, despite their countercultural, anti-institutional 
credentials, there 
is little sense in assuming open products and practices to be opposed to the 
dominant economic order of educational provision. In many ways, the open 
technologies described in this chapter represent a shifting in the economics 
of education. 
The involvement of large dominant educational institutions like 
Harvard, MIT, Stanford and Oxford in the implementation of ‘massively open 
online courses’, for example, highlights the continuation of the established edu- 
cational order. Open technologies could be seen as a ready means of these 
dominant institutional interests and corporate capital identifying and develop- 
ing new markets. Open course ventures such as Coursera and edX are clearly 
based on a ‘freemium’ model of allowing no-cost access to a basic version of the 
‘product’ (i.e., the course content), while requiring payment for the advanced 
‘full’ version (i.e., the certified degree). These free goods and services are also 
means of increasing numbers of users that can then be sold to advertisers, with 
the commodity therefore being the access to users and user data rather than the 
initial product itself. 

=== PAGE 95 ===
Distrusting ‘Open’ Technologies in Education 
81 
As Sharpe (2009) observes, one of the key features of contemporary capitalism 
is the ability to generate profits from ‘free’ information. Indeed, the increased in- 
volvement of large multinational corporations such as Pearson in open education 
movements has caused some consternation. As Cormier (2012, n.p.) reasons, this 
could be seen as little more than a corporate misappropriation of a countercul- 
tural ethic (what he derides as putting ‘a Deadhead sticker on a Cadillac’), and 
thereby misappropriating open education as “a new business model — not a new 
model of learning”. As Geert Lovink (2011) has also contended, notions such 
as Creative Commons, open content, free software and open access do little to 
challenge or alter the basic revenue model of capitalist society. Indeed, it could 
be argued that these movements strengthen the hegemony of corporate capitalist 
interests by appearing to challenge and undermine their dominance while actu- 
ally reinforcing it: 
The networks of communicative capitalism at the basis of Free Software 
instead produce inequality, insecurity, and subjection to the conditions and 
demands of a recalcitrant finance sector. What proffered itself as a vehicle 
for bringing in something new, something better, becomes the mechanism 
for further embedding and extending the old, now strengthened by the 
rhetoric of its own over-coming. 
(Dean 2010, p. 27) 
Seen in these terms, one of the more likely outcomes of the increased use 
of open products and practices in education is the increased exploitation of in- 
dividuals. 
The framing of the individual user of open educational resources and 
courses as the administrator and accreditor of his or her own learning therefore 
also enforces the notion of the self-responsibilized and self-disciplining learner. 
As Jeremy Knox (2012, n.p.) observes, the model of open educational resources 
“permits particular behaviours and activities that influence and compound the 
sense of autonomy and empowerment in the production of the self as human 
capital”. More subtly, open models of peer production also involve the exploita- 
tion of the individuals that contribute their ‘free labour’ to the peer production 
of open educational resources and content. Of course supporters of the open 
technology movement tend to portray these participants in heroic terms — take 
Branco’s (2006, p. 295) celebration of the “cyber proletarians who make life hell 
for Bill Gates”. However, these contributors could be seen alternatively as part of 
the huge rise of free labour that has taken place throughout digitally based cul- 
tural industries — notably in the reliance within the computer games industry on a 
‘shadow industry’ of games players being involved in finding bugs and other faults, 
and later encouraged to produce additional user-generated content, modifications 
and other forms of microdevelopment (Terranova 2004). As Dyer-Witheford and 
de Peuter (2009, p. 27) conclude, while “initially a subversive threat to corporate 
control of digital culture, the [IT] industry has increasingly learned to suck up 
volunteer production as a source of innovation and profit”. 

=== PAGE 96 ===
82 
Distrusting ‘Open’ Technologies in Education 
Conclusions 
Although ‘open’ technologies are celebrated as a common, fair and counterhege- 
monic form of digital education, this chapter has developed an argument that they 
are, in fact, a ready vehicle for individualism, neo-liberalism and new capitalist 
ideology. These are technologies that embody values of individualism, compe- 
tition and transient forms of ‘collaboration’. Moreover, there are significant in- 
equalities of participation in terms of the production and consumption of open 
products — seemingly reinforcing inequalities between technological elites and the 
majority of mainstream consumers of technology. While these products and ser- 
vices may appear to be positioned outside the market economics of conventional 
educational provision, there is a sense that they continue to be commodified, and 
subject to an exchange economy rather than a pure gift economy basis. Finally, it 
can be argued that open technologies are entwined with new capitalist modes of 
exploitation — not least the exploitation of the free immaterial labour involved 
in the production and reproduction of open content. In contrast to current en- 
thusiasms, it would therefore seem that there are some significant limitations to 
the adoption of digitally enabled open products and practices in education. As 
Rhoads, Brown and Toven-Lindsey (2013, p. 106) Conclude, 
Critical questions must be asked about the nature of the [Open Course- 
ware] movement and its growing appeal. Otherwise, whatever democratic 
potential it does hold may be easily minimized or eradicated by a variety 
of power/knowledge inequities operating in antidemocratic ways. This . 
. 
. 
raises critical questions about the Open Courseware movement with regard 
to the nature of the knowledge being advanced (the problem of episte- 
mology), the conditions of construction and delivery of information and 
knowledge (the problem of pedagogy), and the potential for certain social 
actors, institutions, and nations to dominate courseware development and, 
in essence, further dominate the advance of knowledge (the problem of 
hegemony). 
All of these issues point to antidemocratic facets of the Open 
Courseware movement — a reality that is almost never addressed in the 
Open Courseware literature. 
This disjuncture could be said to stem largely from the fact that many of those 
arguing for the use of open products and practices in education are presuppos- 
ing (and indeed hoping for) a fundamental ‘domain shift’ (Sennett 2008) in the 
practices of education. 
As such these arguments are wilfully and provocatively at 
odds with formal educational contexts, where it can be argued that the likelihood 
of teachers and learners getting involved 
in the production of open software or 
content are curtailed by the realities of institutionalized education — not least is- 
sues of time, technical expertise, interest and motivation. 
Thus it could be argued 
that openness is not necessarily being promoted for reasons of ‘educational fit’ 

=== PAGE 97 ===
Distrusting ‘Open’ Technologies in Education 
83 
or effectiveness. Rather it is based upon a variety of political, social and cultural 
agendas centred on a desire to reorientate educational institutions and systems 
and the power relations therein. Although often conflicting in their political and 
ideological intention, most of these viewpoints are compromised by a shared 
determinist viewpoint that overlooks the limiting influence that social relations 
have on open production processes. One emerging contention in this sense is that 
if such misrepresentative rhetoric is allowed to go unchallenged, then enthusiasm 
for the ‘open’ will continue to act only as a distraction to more fundamental 
problems facing education. With these thoughts in mind, it is now time to turn 
our attention to another ostensibly ‘disruptive’ form of digital education that is 
widely feted in educational technology circles — the use of games and gaming 
technologies. 

=== PAGE 98 ===
5 
DISTRUSTING ‘GAMES’ 
TECHNOLOGIES IN EDUCATION 
Introduction 
More than 50 years after the development of rudimentary games of “Tennis for 
Two’ and ‘Spacewar’ in research labs of US universities and government organi- 
zations, games are now one of the most popular and profitable genres of digital 
technology. Games have grown to be a mainstream and diverse element of the 
digital iandscape, and are seen increasingly as a source of education as well as en- 
tertainment. 
The term ‘digital game’ encompasses a range of applications — from 
relatively simple ‘casual’ games for smartphones and other mobile devices, and 
‘social gaming’ applications embedded into social networks, to complex ‘massively 
multiplayer’ online games and multimillion-dollar blockbuster console games. 
While traditionally seen as the preserve of male, adolescent users, gaming is now a 
popular practice across most demographic groups. Studies conducted for the US 
games industry, for example, suggest that the average games player is 30 years old 
and has been playing for 12 years. Sixty-eight per cent of game players are aged 
18 years or older, with a broadly equal split between men and women. Signifi- 
cantly, it is estimated that over 90 per cent of children and young people play with 
digital games (ESA 2012). 
Mirroring this expansion in users, digital gaming is now a substantial business 
concern. From a commercial point of view, the games industry is estimated to 
be worth in excess of $50 billion, with the most popular games being consumed 
in vast quantities. It is reckoned that over 1 billion copies of the ‘Angry Birds’ 
and 100 million copies of the “Tetris’ smartphone games have been downloaded. 
Similarly, over 40 million copies of the various ‘Super Mario Brothers’ games have 
been purchased. As such, games playing is one of the core applications of most 
digital devices — from the smartphone to the desktop computer and dedicated 

=== PAGE 99 ===
Distrusting ‘Games’ Technologies in Education 
85 
console. The most successful games are now prominent elements of contempo- 
rary popular culture, and the production of digital games is increasingly seen as a 
serious creative and artistic endeavour. Most importantly, the practice of playing a 
game is generally associated with a range of potential benefits above and beyond 
entertainment. All in all, many commentators now see games as an integral ele- 
ment 
of using digital technology. As Tom Chatfield (2010, p. 28) reasons, 
We are deeply and fundamentally attracted, in fact, to games: those places 
where efforts and excellence are rewarded, where the challenges and de- 
mands are severe, and where success often resembles nothing so much as a 
distilled version of the worldly virtues of dedicated learning and rigorously 
coordinated effort. 
What Constitutes a Digital Game? 
Despite their longevity, the definition of what a digital ‘game’ is remains a source 
of considerable disagreement. 
There are, of course, many different forms of digital 
game — from simple games of chance, games of skill and role play and strategy 
games to scenario planning and mimetic play. Games differ not only in their 
subject and scope but also in terms of their emphasis on chance and strategy, re- 
petitiveness and linearity, time boundedness and whether the player views events 
from the perspective of ‘first person’, ‘third person’ or even ‘god’. Games can be 
played by solitary individuals or by ‘multiplayer’ groups of thousands of remotely 
connected people. Amidst this diversity, it is perhaps understandable that digi- 
tal games continue to suffer from what Waern (2012, n.p.) terms an “everlasting 
problem of definition”. Nevertheless, despite the broad scope of the genre, all 
games can be said to share some common characteristics. In this sense, Waern 
(2012) offers two dominant lines of definition — that is, defining digital games 
as systems or else as forms of human activity. Both these perspectives are worth 
considering in further detail. 
The notion of games as ‘systems’ reflects the significance of rule-bound ac- 
tions within any form of digital game. As Zimmerman and Salen (2003, p. 80) 
note, from this perspective a digital game can be described as “a system in which 
players engage in an artificial conflict, defined by rules, that results in a quantifi- 
able outcome”. 
The notion of games as an ‘activity’, on the other hand, implies 
that it is not the digital game itself that is of primary interest but the act of play- 
ing the digital game — something that can vary considerably between different 
players. For example, the activity of playing digital games can be driven by play 
motivations that are not bound by shared conventions and rules of the system, 
but are more exploratory and free-form in nature — what Gaver (2002) terms 
‘playful interactions’. Thinking beyond the system of the digital game is also evi- 
dent in the academic trend to focus on the ‘narratology’ of games — that is, adopt- 
ing a literary theory approach which positions the digital game as a story and text 

=== PAGE 100 ===
86 
Distrusting ‘Games’ Technologies in Education 
akin to films, books and television. From this perspective, games can be described 
as forms of interactive fiction that involve storytelling through the communica- 
tion of events, settings, characters and perspectives, and therefore constitute an 
embodied, experiential form of narrative (Carr 2006). While contestable, these 
descriptions of activity and narrative highlight the importance of the representa- 
tional dimension of digital games alongside the regulatory dimension. 
These differences in definition correspond in part with various understand- 
ings of ‘play’ that can be associated with digital games. Here Caillois’ (2001) hi- 
erarchical classification of play (from ‘paidia’ to ‘ludus’) is often drawn upon. At 
one extreme, ‘paidiac’ play can be described as ‘spontaneous’, ‘frolicsome’ and 
‘instinctive’ manifestations of the ‘play instinct’ (Caillois 2001, p. 27). This form 
of play therefore includes free-form and unscripted amusements, open-ended 
role playing and fantasy play. In contrast, the conception of ‘ludic’ play describes 
more formal instances of play that are bound by rules and conventions, and based 
upon “the pleasure experienced in solving a problem arbitrarily designed for 
this purpose” (Caillois 2001, p. 28). Clearly, then, the notion of ‘digital games’ 
should not be taken to encompass all forms of digital play — especially the purer 
forms of paidiac play. Thus, as Buckingham (2006;p. 6) acknowledges, 
“all games 
must be played, but not all play takes the form of a game”. In defining digital 
games one should therefore accept some degree of pre-agreed form and rule- 
boundedness. Thinking along these lines, Waern (2012, n.p.) offers a nuanced 
working definition of digital games as “systems, which have been designed to be 
played or evolved within a play practice”. This definition seems as good as any to 
take forward into the remainder of this chapter. 
~ 
The notion of digital games as systems that have evolved from play practices 
and the activity of play clearly draws on many of the characteristics associated 
with Caillois’ notion of ‘ludus’. Indeed, as Juul (2003) reasons, the characteristics 
that set digital gaming apart from other digital media can be described in largely 
ludic terms. In particular, digital games can be seen as being based (to some ex- 
tent) around sets of rules and parameters, as well as corresponding sets of goals and 
opposing means of preventing players from reaching these goals without some 
effort. Digital games can also be defined as having varied outcomes which are 
usually quantifiable and assigned different values. Moreover, digital games require 
players to invest effort in achieving these desired outcomes and thereby manipu- 
late forms of emotional ‘attachment’ to succeeding in the game. The embodiment 
of all these characteristics within a digital game therefore sees gaming actions 
structured by a complex of “protocols, networks, codes and algorithms” designed 
to represent these characteristics in a computerized form (Krapp 2011, p. 77). 
Thus at the heart of digital ‘gameplay’ is the ability of players to ‘fit’ themselves 
around the coded contours of the game as programmed into the computer. As 
Tom Apperley (2009, p. 24) describes, 
Players are insinuated into the rhythm of the game through the process of 
play; they must ‘fit’ into the rhythm of the game, not vice versa... .'To win 

=== PAGE 101 ===
Distrusting ‘Games’ Technologies in Education 
87 
you can’t just do whatever you want. You have to figure out what will work 
within the rules of the game. You must learn to predict the consequences 
of each move, and anticipate the computer’s response. Eventually your de- 
cisions become intuitive, as smooth and rapid fire as the computer’s own 
machinations. 
This on-going attuning process of learning to anticipate and 
_ respond to the computer’s actions begins a rhythm of action and reaction 
that involves the internalization of the computer's rhythm by the player . 
. 
. 
a “merging of consciousness’, precipitated by thinking like the computer. 
As with any computer application, then, digital gaming needs to be under- 
stood as an essentially bounded and predefined activity — albeit often one that 
allows the potential for huge variation of action and engagement. As Grimes 
and Feenberg (2012) suggest, the ‘game world’ of any specific digital game is 
perhaps best understood as structured around a finite set of themes and activities 
defined by the games designer and developex. While this predesignated architec- 
ture demands a precision from the games player, players can still act in a variety 
of ‘playful’ ways within their direct interactions with the rules, temporality, se- 
quence and structures of a game. As Newman (2004, p. 92) observes, “Not every 
player plays a given game in the same way, nor do they necessarily seek the same 
pleasures from their play”. Thus when playing a digital game, individuals can 
play in a number of different ways. A game can be played simply by ‘exploring’ 
and interacting with the game world, or by seeking actively to ‘achieve’ success 
through acting on the rules and goals of the game world (Bartle 1997). Alterna- 
tively, gameplay can be approached as a means of ‘socializing’ with other players, 
or alternatively striving to outperform and fulfil a desire to win at the expense 
and distress of others (what Bartle describes as displaying a ‘killer’ mentality). 
As 
Aarseth (2005) and others have noted, games can also be played by intentionally 
modifying or breaking the rules of the game through forms of ‘cheating’ and 
‘counterplay’. 
These varied forms of interaction coupled with the acceptance of arbitrary 
rules and conventions reflect the fact that playing a digital game evokes a sense of 
distinctness and separation from the real world. As Buckingham (2006) observes, 
one of the defining characteristics of digital games playing is its status as an alter- 
nate ‘fictional’ activity that is set apart from ‘ordinary life’. This otherworldliness 
can be seen in terms of the ‘protective frame’ that surrounds a person in a playful 
state of mind — a frame that derives from the ‘social contract’ that constitutes the 
act of playing a game (Stenros 2012). Some commentators have gone as far as 
suggesting the establishment of a ‘magic circle’ once a game begins to be played 
(Zimmerman & Salen 2003). The notion of the ‘magic circle’ sees the act of play- 
ing a game located within a ‘special place in time and space’ where actions are 
interpreted playfully, the rules of the game have authority and the actions that take 
place have no direct effect on the everyday world. In this sense, playing a digital 
game can be seen as a ritualistic endeavour that is socially and mentally divided 
from ordinary life (Stenros 2012). 

=== PAGE 102 ===
88 
Distrusting ‘Games’ Technologies in Education 
The Rise of Educational Interest in 
Digital Games and Gaming 
These characteristics certainly lend digital games an exotic and seductive air when 
compared to other seemingly more mundane forms of educational technology. 
The inherent appeal of digital games to educationalists is heightened further by 
the many benefits that are believed to be inherent in the practice of games playing. 
For example, alongside increased psychomotor development and hand-eye coor- 
dination, a range of cognitive benefits have been perceived in terms of mental 
agility and neurological capacity. Some commentators have pointed to benefits 
associated with the increased sociability of game playing and the creative practices 
that can take place within and around the playing of digital games. In these terms, 
digital gaming is often associated with a number of emotional and psychological 
outcomes. For example, games playing is described as evoking a sense of ‘hard fun’ 
that derives from the delayed emotional gratification of overcoming challenges and 
winning battles. Borrowing a concept from the field of positive psychology, games 
are also associated with an enhanced ‘flow’ — that is, a sense of intense happiness 
that can come from the ‘immersive power of play’ (McGonigal 2011). In all these 
ways, then, games playing is often described as an intensely stimulating experience. 
It is perhaps not surprising that digital games have come to be associated so 
closely with education. 
As has already been suggested, learning is seen to be a key 
element to successfully playing a digital game. As Carr, Oliver and Burn (2010, 
p. 23) reason, “Learning obviously happens in this game world .. 
. otherwise play- 
ers would not progress”. Moreover, alongside the implicit learning that takes place 
within the mastery of any digital game, there is a long history of the development 
of explicitly ‘educational games’. One of the earliest mainstream examples of edu- 
cational gaming was the ‘Oregon Trail’ adventure game — originally developed in 
1971 and requiring players to re-enact the nineteenth-century North American 
pioneer trail. Schools have long made use of specifically designed games — most 
famously the ‘Math Blaster’ and ‘Carmen Sandiego’ series of games, which have 
been regularly revised and reassessed since the early 1980s. Similarly, there is a well- 
established lineage of educational games for adults, including the popular mental 
development games such as ‘Dr Kawashima’s Brain Training’ and ‘Big Brain Acad- 
emy’. In workplace settings, there has also been a long-standing use of training 
games in areas such as aviation, military combat, business and management. 
Against this background, there is now considerable interest in digital games 
as a mainstream form of educational technology. Echoing what was described in 
Chapter 1 as the ‘boosterism’ that often surrounds educational technology, there 
has been a notable tendency for the educational benefits of games to be por- 
trayed in exaggeratedly enthusiastic terms — as a ‘panacea for education’ (Spring 
2012, p. 98), or as “a Holy Grail in the uphill battle to keep kids learning” (Salen 
2008, p. 2). 
As such accolades suggest, digital games are often framed as an other- 
worldly means of rejuvenating formal educational practices. Thus, as Caroline 

=== PAGE 103 ===
Distrusting ‘Games’ Technologies in Education 
89 
Pelletier (2009, p. 84) contends, “a consequence of this is that games and game- 
play tend to be treated as ‘out there’, beyond the school gate, in some better, 
more authentic, more democratic, more meaningful place, other than the cur- 
rent and failing educational regime”. This rhetoric clearly requires unpacking — 
especially in terms of the silences that lie beneath this notion of games as an 
inherently ‘better’ means of supporting educational engagement. Looking beyond 
these heightened expectations, we can therefore identify three recurrent forms of 
game use in education that are worthy of further discussion: the development of 
bespoke games for education; the use of commercial games in education; and the 
rearrangement of education along game-based lines. 
I. Developing Games for Education 
As just described, there is a long history of games being produced specifically for 
educational purposes — from simple counting, spelling and math games to more 
complex and involved adventure and strategy games based around particular ele- 
ments of school and university curricula, as well as the training needs of business 
and commerce. While these games are often produced on a commercial basis, the 
rise of online and smartphone-based games playing has also led to a rise in the 
production of small-scale casual educational games. Public organizations such as 
the British Broadcasting Corporation and the US Public Broadcasting Service 
now produce a variety of free online educational games designed to be used from 
preschool to high school level. 
As Joel Spring (2012, p. 81) contends, 
With smart phone apps, children carry the school in their hands. The home 
is curricularized the child’s entire life. Educational apps are marketed as 
edutainment; learning for adults and fun for kids. 
As Spring implies, the development of digital games to be played within edu- 
cational settings sits alongside an established tradition of the development of digi- 
tal games aiming to ‘curricularize’ the home — often referred to as ‘edutainment’ 
(i.e.,a combination of education and entertainment). Some of these games have 
proved to be highly popular. For example, one of the most popular computer 
games in recent times has been ‘Dr Kawashima’ Brain Training’ — a mental agil- 
ity game for children and adults that has sold tens of millions of copies since its 
launch in the mid-2000s. 
With the ever increasing sales of digital devices such as 
tablet computers to parents anxious to augment their children’s formal education, 
the edutainment software market is now one of the fastest growing sectors of the 
commercial IT industry. 
In contrast to these examples, the genre of ‘serious games’ (also referred to 
as ‘smart games’ or ‘game learning’) is another form of gaming that has been 
developed increasingly for educational settings. While a loosely defined term, se- 
rious games tend to place less emphasis on the playful and enjoyable elements 

=== PAGE 104 ===
90 
Distrusting ‘Games’ Technologies in Education 
of digital gaming, and instead make use of games as a method of ongoing train- 
ing within formal educational institutions and workplace contexts. As Apperley 
(2009, p. 105-106) describes, 
While diverse, the genre [of serious games] is united by a sense of purpose. 
Play of serious games has deliberate stakes; it is neither play as an escape 
from everyday life, nor as the development of ill-defined general skills 
. 
. 
. 
Serious games propose purposeful play with meaningful outcomes; they 
aim to bring an issue, or issues, to the players’ attention through play. The 
primary significance of this sub-industry of digital games is that it positions 
the communication of ideas and persuasion through play as an essential, 
rather than periphery, design concern. 
In many ways, the ‘meaningful’ element of serious gaming relates to the devel- 
opment of systems and procedures that are less detached from real-world contexts 
than is usually the case in digital gaming — as Ian Bogost (2011) puts it, serious 
games are based around content that is ‘beyond entertainment’. 
The scope of seri- 
ous games ranges from physical exercise (‘exergames’) to activist and propaganda 
games that relate to political issues and debates. Recently, interest in serious games 
has extended to the increased use of games mechanics within versions of the 
simulation software reviewed in Chapter 3. This includes the production of highly 
complex battlefield simulations used by the military and surgical simulations for 
use by health professionals — all allowing individuals to experience a range of 
processes and outcomes while ‘playing’ to gain points and complete against other 
players. Thus, as Arora (2012, p. 612) concludes, 
play is used to engage in serious endeavours of social transformation and 
education where conventional strategies have perhaps failed. The sancti- 
mony of the serious gets webbed with play, and instead of trivializing the 
goal, it can give it a new lease to life. 
Il, Using Games in Education 
Of course, there has also long been considerable interest in the educational ben- 
efits of playing commercially produced popular games and, in particular, the ben- 
efits that can be gained by using such games within formal educational settings. 
While some commentators argue that any game can be of educational benefit, 
enthusiasm has tended to be directed towards ‘importing’ particular genres of 
games into classrooms and curricula. For instance, much attention has been paid 
towards the use of ‘realistic’ simulation games as offering a ready means of sup- 
porting exploratory spaces for constructivist learning (e.g., Collins & Halverson 
2009). These include ‘sandbox’ games such as “The Sims’ where players control 
artificial populations, empire-building games such as the ‘Civilization’ series, 

=== PAGE 105 ===
Distrusting ‘Games’ Technologies in Education 
91 
city-building games such as ‘SimCity’ and business and management games such 
as ‘Railroad Tycoon’ and ‘Rollercoaster Tycoon’. Games of this sort are seen to 
engender a range of skills, competencies and understandings — in particular sup- 
porting constructivist forms of learning through exploration, problem solving, 
development of complex microworlds and reflection on experience. 
There has also been growing educational interest in the use of online ‘game 
worlds’ — in particular ‘massively multiplayer online role playing games’. As their 
name suggests, these games put players in control of customized characters within 
extensive, geographical cohesive environments which are populated by numerous 
other player-characters. Players then progress through these digitally supported 
worlds by interacting with others — often forming associations and groups to ac- 
complish necessary tasks. 
As such, these online game worlds require users to inter- 
act consciously with particular structures and constraints while offering multiple 
modes of participation (Carr, Oliver & Burn 2010). Much of the educational 
benefit from these games is seen as arising from interactions with other players. 
Online game worlds will often involve the formation of ‘clans’ or ‘guilds’ that in- 
volve groups of players within elaborate social protocols and complex divisions of 
labour. Here experienced players will assist novices by teaching tactics, orientat- 
ing them to the geography of the game world, upholding codes of behaviour and 
other forms of ‘community’-based learning. 
lil, Redesigning Education Along Gaming Lines 
Thirdly, interest is also growing in the imposition of games design and games 
mechanics onto real-life contexts and settings, thereby rearranging and reordering 
educational settings as ‘play-driven spaces’ (Arora 2012). This sometimes involves 
the educational application of ‘augmented reality’ techniques — that is, the addi- 
tion of computer-generated features (such as graphics, video or sound) — to real- 
life physical environments. 
There are a growing number of such applications. For 
example, Arora (2012) describes the conversion of staircases in a Swedish subway 
station to depict giant piano keys, thereby encouraging people to walk up and 
down stairs rather than take escalators. 
The use of such ‘choice architecture’ is seen 
as encouraging ‘productive’ behaviour change through the introduction of digi- 
tally supported play. In more explicitly educational terms, recent developments 
in mobile technology, wireless connectivity and global positioning systems have 
supported the development of outdoor role-playing games that respond to learn- 
ers’ physical environments as well as their interactions with other learners who 
are also playing. Using mobile technologies, for example, different features can be 
imported into the same environment, so that a classroom becomes a surgical op- 
erating theatre, or a small piece of woodland becomes a vast Amazonian rainforest 
(see Klopfer 2008). It is argued that these forms of ‘mobile gaming’ can support 
learning that is both ‘social’ (meaning that it can involve ‘real’ social relationships 
between learners) and ‘authentic’ (meaning that it relates to actual people, places 

=== PAGE 106 ===
92 
Distrusting ‘Games’ Technologies in Education 
and events). In Grabinger, Dunlap and Duffield’s terms, these technologies can 
support ‘rich environments for active learning’ (1996, p. 5). 
Another trend is the embedding of game mechanics and “interactive online 
design that plays on people’s competitive instincts” into everyday educational 
contexts (Quitney & Rainie 2012, p. 1). This ‘gamification’ of education has been 
realized in different ways. One recent instance has been the promotion of digital 
‘badges’ that recognise and reward instances of informal learning in noneducational 
contexts. The use of badges to recognise different instances of alternate learn- 
ing is seen as motivating informal learning behaviours and encouraging interac- 
tions between different individuals and organizations. 
As the Mozilla (2012, n.p.) 
‘open badge’ project states, 
A ‘digital badge’ is an online record of achievements, tracking the recipient’s 
communities of interaction that issued the badge and the work completed 
to get it. Digital badges can support connected learning environments by 
motivating learning and signalling achievement both within particular 
communities as well as across communities and institutions. 
Alternatively, other educationalists have been involved in the gamification of for- 
mal educational practices and processes. Perhaps the most striking example of 
this has been the development of public high schools in New York and Chi- 
cago around game-based ‘quest’ principles. In this case, the social organization 
and physical architecture of the school reflect a game-based learning model, with 
classrooms and curriculum designed to support students within inquiry-based 
activities of ‘questing’. Under these conditions the school curriculum is divided 
into ‘domains’, with teaching and learning based around game principles involv- 
ing secret ‘discovery missions’, students being ‘levelled-up’ in academic difficulty 
and so on. In this sense, gamification can be seen as striving to combine intrinsic 
motivation, competitive sentiment, performance measurement and metrics with 
the extrinsic rewards associated with play (Nelson 2012; Williamson 2014). As 
Salen, Torres, Wolozin, Rufo-Tepper and Shapiro (2011, n.p.) conclude, 
Gaming and game design offer a promising new paradigm for curriculum and 
learning. 
The designers of Quest to Learn developed an approach to learning 
that draws from what games do best: drop kids into inquiry-based, complex 
problem spaces that are built to help players understand how they are doing, 
what they need to work on, and where to go next. Content is not treated as 
dry information but as a living resource; students are encouraged to interact 
with the larger world in ways that feel relevant, exciting, and empowering. 
The Perceived Educational Benefits of Games and Gaming 
As all these examples imply, educational efforts to make use of games and gam- 
ing are usually motivated by a number of perceived benefits. In an immediate 

=== PAGE 107 ===
Distrusting ‘Games’ Technologies in Education 
93 
sense, games are described as an inherently enjoyable and ‘truly fun’ means of 
stimulating learning (Bell, Smith-Robbins & Withnail 2010). The sense of play 
as offering “a rupture in the everyday” (Apperley 2009, p. 39) is seen widely as 
making educational engagement more motivating, engaging and ‘relevant’ than 
it otherwise would be through traditional means (Pelletier 2009). As suggested 
earlier, some commentators justify this appeal in terms of ‘hard fun’ — that is, giv- 
ing people ‘hard challenging things to do’ that are ‘matched to the individual and 
to the culture of the times” (Papert 2002, p. 3). In similar terms, games are often 
justified as a stimulating amalgamation of the ‘work’ of learning and the ‘leisure’ 
of playing — referred to in some quarters as ‘weisure’ or ‘playbour’ (the latter term 
being an equally unwieldy amalgam of ‘play’ and ‘labour’). Thus learning and its 
assessment are seen as being able to take place in an almost unconscious manner 
when subsumed within the context of a digital game — what Owston (2009) refers 
to as educational processes taking place by ‘stealth’. 
Aside from these motivational benefits, much support for the educational ap- 
plication of digital games relates to perceived links with high-quality learning pro- 
cesses. Indeed, it is believed widely that digital games enhance the processes of 
learning — be this in behavioural, cognitivist or socio-constructivist terms. Thus as 
far as enthusiastic proponents of game-based learning are concerned, much can 
be gained when initially learning to play a game, and then from learning to play 
a game well (Prensky 2005). For instance, it is argued that the processes of playing 
a game entail a range of inherent learning outcomes — in Becker’s (2011) words, 
things that one must learn before one can play effectively and eventually win or 
complete the game. In this sense, games clearly involve the development of psycho- 
motor and cognitive skills, alongside complex series of memorization and compre- 
hension, which are developed and achieved through gradated practice and eventual 
mastery. As Krapp (2011) continues, the design rules of games tend to require the 
development of a range of additional skills and competencies — not least efficiency 
and expediency of action, alongside a mastery of interfaces and interactions. 
While these skills and competencies are important, many commentators argue 
that the educational potential of computer games lies in the learning that can 
occur beyond the learning that is necessary to simply play a game. This is what 
Becker (2011, p. 4) classifies as ‘things we can learn’, and includes forms of ‘col- 
lateral learning’ (i.e., things that “are not part of the game and that do not impact 
on our success in the game” [ibid.]) and ‘external learning’ (1.e., “learning that 
can impact on our success in the game but that happens entirely outside of the 
game” [ibid.]). In these terms, games can be seen as supporting a wide range 
of more sustained and complex forms of learning. The point was illustrated in 
David Sudnow’s (2000) description of his own efforts to learn to play a ‘perfect’ 
game on the 1980s’ arcade game ‘Breakout’. Sudnow equated this task to learn- 
ing simultaneously to watch a television, operate a typewriter and play a piano. 
Thus playing any form of computer game could be seen as involving similar 
combinations of manual dexterity and delicate mental creativity. As Krapp (2011, 
p. 77) concludes, 

=== PAGE 108 ===
94 
Distrusting ‘Games’ Technologies in Education 
The difference between playing a game and playing with a game is crucial 
to gaming culture: whereas the former teaches one the game through navi- 
gating the game’s commands and controls, the latter opens up to critical and 
self-aware exploration. Like learning to swim, gaming means learning to 
learn and initiates us into training systems, but like learning to read, it does 
not stop at a literal obedience to the letter. 
Thus, akin to learning to read or play the piano, games are seen to correspond 
with a range of ‘higher order’ domains of learning. Of all the claims made for 
the learning potential of digital games, perhaps the most extensively argued has 
been James Paul Gee’s (2003) 36 ‘learning principles’ that he argued underpin the 
self-directed learning undertaken by game players as they encounter and master 
a ‘good’ game. According to Gee, for example, digital games usually demand that 
players actively and critically engage with the design principles of the game. Gee 
also sees players as learning from being required to engage with the multiple ways 
that meanings are signified and conveyed within games — such as images, words, 
actions, symbols, abstract design and other artefacts. In this sense, much game- 
based learning can be seen as semiotic and ‘multimodal’ in nature. Within the 
context of the game, Gee describes learning as taking place through discovery and 
interaction with other agents within the game — be it other players (in the case 
of multiplayer games) or computer-generated characters. In this sense, meaning 
and knowledge can be seen as distributed across the learner, objects, tools, sym- 
bols, technologies and ‘material objects’ within the game environment. Gee also 
suggests that learning often occurs through the assumption within the design of 
many games that players take on and play with a number of new identities. 
Gee’s arguments are now repeated widely within educational discussions — a 
popularity that stems, in part, from the commonsensical correspondences be- 
tween these descriptions of game-based learning and sociocultural views of 
learning. Indeed, digital games are seen as having a close affinity with the socio- 
cultural and socio-constructivist philosophies of learning that are central to much 
educational thinking about technology. From this perspective, learning is seen as 
arising from not only the game itself but also the practices of ‘gaming’ that sur- 
round it — that is, “the sum total of activities, literacies, knowledge and practices 
activated in and around any instance of a game” (Salen 2008, p. 9). For example, 
much interest has been shown in the sociocultural learning potential of partici- 
pating in ‘massively multiplayer online games’ such as World of Warcraft. These 
gaming environments are based on large groups of users encountering, interact- 
ing and engaging with other users. These processes often lead to the formation 
of informal and formal communities where users will work together in groups 
with hierarchies of expertise and learning. In all these ways, multiplayer online 
gaming and virtual worlds are seen as supporting the ‘social dynamic’ that many 
educationalists believe lies at the heart of effective learning. Thus, as Kurt Squire 
(2006, p. 22) contends, 

=== PAGE 109 ===
Distrusting ‘Games’ Technologies in Education 
95 
today’s generation of games contain a whole new set of features, making 
them intriguing suites of learning. Specifically, they are sites where we can 
look at learning both as (a) interaction in the social and material world, 
where learners participate in open and closed problem solving; and (b) par- 
ticipation in distributed social organizations such as self-organizing learning 
communities, which are microcosms for studying the emergence, mainte- 
nance, transformation, and even collapse of online affinity groups. 
Aside from these situated and highly socialized modes of learning, games are 
also valued for their capacity to support users in engaging with ideas and knowl- 
edge in a more dynamic manner. As Ian Bogost (2011, n.p.) reasons, “Because 
games are systems, they offer a fundamentally different way of characterizing ideas. 
They can inspire a different kind of deliberation than we find in other forms of 
media, one that considers the uncertainty of complex systems instead of em- 
bracing simple answers”. Thus digital games are seen by some commentators as 
providing rich, interactive environments within which users can interact with 
concepts, narratives and knowledge in a manner that is meaningful and relevant to 
their situation (if only the immediate situation of having to play the game). Thus, 
as Barab, Gresalfi, Dodge and Ingram-Goble (2010, p. 28) argue, digital games 
make abstract concepts not only more concrete but also more consequential as 
players use these concepts to make sense of — and transform — particular narratives 
and storylines within the game: 
By bounding up disciplinary context within interactive narrative contexts, 
we have the potential to not only change learners’ understanding of the 
use value of the content but also offer the opportunity for learners to see 
themselves as capable of meaningfully applying disciplinary content. Many 
commercial games 
. 
. 
. provide learners with a sense of legitimacy, inten- 
tionality, and consequentiality in ways that are difficult to achieve in many 
school-based lessons. 
Criticisms of Digital Games and Education 
While much support can be found for the inherently educational nature of digital 
games, this is an area of educational technology that also attracts a considerable 
level of controversy. In particular, doubts continue to be raised regarding the em- 
pirical rigour of most studies purporting to demonstrate links between gameplay 
and educational benefit (Egenfeldt-Nielsen 2006). As Owston (2009, p. 106) notes 
wryly, “There is much more enthusiasm shown in the literature for describing the 
affordances of games than for conducting research that demonstrates the impact of 
these affordances on instruction”. Interestingly, proponents of educational games 
are often quick to defend the lack of rigorous positive evidence by acknowledging 
that not all games “are good for all learners and for all learning outcomes” (Van 

=== PAGE 110 ===
96 
Distrusting ‘Games’ Technologies in Education 
Eck 2006, p. 18). 
As such, any lack of rigorous evidence is taken primarily to be 
evidence of the failings of specific designers and products rather than the gen- 
eral principle of game-based learning. As Marc Prensky (2005, p. 103) reasoned, 
“Many criticize today’s learning games, and there is much to criticize. But if some 
of these games don’t produce learning it is not because they are games, or because 
the concept of ‘game-based learning’ is faulty. It’s because those particular games 
are badly designed”. 
Generally, then, the use of digital games in education has managed to avoid 
sustained criticism, with many academics prepared to spare gaming the scrutiny 
that is often directed towards other forms of educational technology. At best, the 
arguments against digital games in education have tended to be sensationalist and 
largely unconvincing. For example, opposition continues to be raised against the 
generally detrimental and ‘harmful’ nature of many games. For example, digital 
games have long been the focus for a series of moral panics, much as was the case 
with previous popular media such as comics, television, cinema and video (Martin 
2012). One of the foremost objectives of these criticisms has been to establish evi- 
dence of the ‘effects’ of digital games based on previous assumptions and research 
on television and video. Thus a series of ‘effects’ research has “‘attempt[ed] to link 
videogame play with horrific events such as shootings and punitive societal decay” 
(Newman 2004, p. 62). 
Similarly, the use of digital games in education has been questioned in terms 
of the supposed addictive qualities of gaming, associations with short- and long- 
term repetitive strain injuries (such as the phenomenon of ‘Nintendo thumb’ 
during the 1990s and 2000s), desensitization to violence and even possible 
negative relationships with scholastic performance (Skoric, Teo and Neo 2009). 
While these arguments retain a credence in popular and political discourse, they 
certainly conform to the ‘doomster’ arguments outlined in Chapter 1. Most 
significantly — and returning to the core theme of this book — these arguments 
obscure a set of ideological criticisms that should be levelled at digital games. 
These all relate to the contention that it is a mistake to see digital games as 
somehow ‘apart’ or ‘separate’ from the social, political, cultural and economic 
contexts of education. Rather than drawing the user into some sort of decon- 
textualized ‘play world’ or ‘magic circle’, the playing of games remains embedded 
firmly in specific contexts and what Sassen (2006) describes as ‘cultures of use’ 
of any technology. It can therefore be argued that situating digital games within 
wider contexts of contemporary education introduces a number of correspon- 
dences that are acknowledged rarely in discussions of games as an educational 
technology. In this sense, four broad sets of objections can be made against the 
increased use of digital games in education: firstly regarding their rationalization 
of education; their entrenchment of dominant values and structures; their com- 
modification of learning and education; and their imbrication of education with 
the interests of capital. These four issues will now be discussed in more detail. 

=== PAGE 111 ===
Distrusting ‘Games’ Technologies in Education 
97 
|. Digital Games and the Rationalization of Education 
First is the contention that digital games are built around a rationalization of 
action through closed forms of repetitive ‘training’ rather than open-ended ex- 
ploration or discovery. This point echoes Grimes and Feenberg’s (2012) analy- 
sis of digital gaming as systems of social rationality. Here it is argued that the 
rule-bound ‘systeny’ of any digital game produces an inherent ‘institutional order’ 
similar to other systems of social rationality. Thus, “similar to economic markets, 
legal systems and scientific research, games break loose from the undifferentiated 
communicative action of ‘ordinary’ life to impose a rational form on a sector of 
experience” (Grimes & Feenberg 2012, p. 21). 
As has been suggested throughout 
this chapter, the realities of game-based play are often structured and constrained 
in nature — not least in the underlying demand of any genre for “‘an ‘infantili- 
zing’ obedience to rules” (Krapp 2011, p. 81). Thus despite their associations with 
intense excitement and thrill seeking, games tend to played along rational and re- 
petitive lines, with players adhering to strict rules and developing bounded strat- 
egies in order to succeed. As Grimes and Feenberg (2012, pp. 22—23) observe, 
Players and player moves are standardized through the program code (ex- 
change of equivalents); formal rules are established by the game engine and 
operators as well as the player community (classification and application of 
rules); and player efforts are optimized and calculated through numeric level- 
ling and points systems that are further reinforced by the status and social 
capital granted to players of high standing. 
In specifically educational terms, then, the argument can be made that the ra- 
tionalization of action inherent in digital games is at odds with freer, individually 
determined forms of learning. Indeed, as Tom Apperley (2009, p. 140) contends, 
the rationalization of learning and education within digital games should be seen 
more accurately as resulting in a form of ‘training’ — in other words, while the 
‘latitude’ or ‘margin’ of free action within games might appear to be considerable, 
any action is free only with respect to being “free within the limits set by the 
rules’. In order to be successful at playing any computer game, therefore, players 
must surrender themselves to the demands and expectations of that game — be 
it in terms of physical movements, postures, gestures and reactions, mental pat- 
terns and processes, emotional states or social interactions. 
The successful player 
is therefore one who is able to adapt him- or herself to the expectations and re- 
quirements of the game. However sophisticated and complex this process of adap- 
tation might be, a player is most accurately described as being trained rather than 
learning per se. This distinction evokes Henri Lefebvre’s (1992/2004) distinction 
between education, learning and training — the latter of which he termed le dres- 
sage. Lefebvre’s description of training in terms of dressage is telling — implying 

=== PAGE 112 ===
98 
Distrusting ‘Games’ Technologies in Education 
a process of repetition and the individual being ‘broken in’ like an animal, and 
therefore being shaped to the accepted values of a wider society or group. Thus, 
as Ted Friedman continues, digital games involve a similar form of ‘breaking in’: 
The way computer games teach structures of thought is by getting you to 
internalise the logic of the program. 
To win, you can’t just do whatever you 
want. You have to figure out what will work within the rules of the game. 
You must learn to predict the consequence of each move, and anticipate the 
computer's response. Eventually, your decisions become intuitive, as smooth 
and rapid fire as the computer’s own machinations. 
. 
(cited in Anderson & Pold 2011, p. 115) 
Of course, the extent to which digital games can be associated with creative, 
educative practice as opposed to repetitive training depends on the context in 
which they are being used, as well as the design of the game and the intentions of 
the player. Many educationalists would acknowledge that the educational games 
of the 1980s followed rather basic repetitive patterns of behaviourist ‘drill and 
practice’ (often referred to in pejorative terms as “drill and kill’). However, most 
would consider the sophisticated and expansive games of the 2010s to offer sub- 
stantially more variety and freedom of action. Yet the counterargument could be 
made that even the most sophisticated and carefully designed digital games retain 
an inherent rationalization of action. By its very nature, therefore, digital gameplay 
is entwined with issues of power and control — not least the capacity of the player 
to make empowered choices and act in meaningful ways. Apperley (2009, p. 41) 
suggests that the complex dynamic between the games player and the game being 
played is “fraught with subtle negotiations of power” which reflect wider societal 
relationships between individuals and technology in a capitalist society. Parallels 
can therefore be drawn with Marx’s description of the necessary adaption of 
workers to machines where ‘the conditions of work employ the worker’. In this 
sense, the educational benefits of digital games could be seen to be compromised 
by an underlying and ongoing tension between the domains of work and leisure, 
play and labour. 
II. Digital Games and the Transmission of Dominant Values 
A second criticism relates to the values and ideologies that are often conveyed 
through games and also associated more subtly with the gaming structure itself. 
Referring back to the idea of digital games as narrative, it is clear that all games 
involve an element of storytelling and therefore convey a variety of messages and 
values within their ‘texts’. In one sense, then, many of these values are ‘written 
into’ the game by developers and designers both intentionally and unintentionally. 
Indeed, a common criticism of digital games — especially real-time strategy games 
and simulation games — is that they convey a limited set of values and interests, 

=== PAGE 113 ===
Distrusting ‘Games’ Technologies in Education 
99 
particularly with regard to their portrayal of gender, race, age and sexuality. As 
Dyer-Witheford and de Peuter (2009, p. 228) observe, many games are infused 
with “banal ideological conventionality” with regard to gender roles, racial profiles 
and notions of masculinity. Another common critique of digital games is their 
dominant framing of thought and action within a militaristic ideology of violent 
competition and conflict, as well as a reliance on tactical and strategic thinking — 
what Kontour (2012, p. 353) terms “the governmentality of the battlefield space”. 
Much has been made of the origins of computer games in US defence-funded 
research and the use of digital games as aids for military training. While the influ- 
ence of these origins on contemporary games is often subtle, it can still be argued 
that the design of most games continues to demand an obedience to follow orders 
and acceptance of hierarchy that is decidedly militaristic in nature. 
In a general sense, then, it can be argued that the mechanical operation of 
any digital game demands that players adhere to a rationalised set of assumptions, 
conventions and dominant values. Many games certainly could be said to indulge 
and normalise traits of individualism, possessiveness and competition. 
These criti- 
cisms apply to even the most expansive and open forms of game environments 
that can still be said to convey a sense of absolute worldview. Thus, as Mackenzie 
Wark (2007, p. 20) reasons, games are not accurate or open-ended representa- 
tions of the world — instead they are allegories that “encode the abstract principles 
upon which decisions about the realness of this or that world are decided”. These 
arguments were illustrated in Ted Friedman’s (1999) critique of the popular ‘Civi- 
lization’ series of empire-building games. Here Friedman outlined a number of 
ideological assumptions that underpinned the ‘logic of the program’, and that had 
to be successfully internalized by players in order for them to progress success- 
fully and eventually win the game. As Friedman (1999, p. 145) described, these 
dominant values included an overt emphasis on expansionist competition rather 
than outright collaboration, reflecting an underpinning assumption that “global 
coexistence is a matter of winning and losing”. Success in the game also rested on 
overseeing the in-game development of new technologies, reflecting an implicit 
scientific determinism as well as an ahistorical conceptualization of science, reli- 
gion and the development of nations. This latter point was reinforced by Gallo- 
way’s (2006, p. 96) example of the game’s insistence on “the founding of a market 
economy in a place called ‘London’ in 4000 BC”. Moreover, Friedman also points 
to the game’s oversimplification of colonization and imperialism, enforced by its 
underpinning sense of nationalistic destiny and the stereotyping of homogenous 
(rather than diverse and hybrid) cultural formations. 
These ideological assumptions could be said to be determined largely by the de- 
signers, developers and producers of games. However, it can also be argued that 
the underpinning ‘system’ of the digital game leads to an imposition of a domi- 
nant valuing of algorithmic determination and computational thinking — along 
the lines of what Galloway (2006) refers to as ‘algorithmic culture’. Thus, as Dyer- 
Witheford and de Peuter (2009, p. 220) reason, “in a sense every game, even 

=== PAGE 114 ===
100 
Distrusting ‘Games’ Technologies in Education 
apparently very simple ones, is a world.'To play is to figure out a universe. 
To win 
demands experimentally learning a system, a programmed ecology, or code me- 
tabolism whose simple algorithms generate more or less complex events”. Thus, 
despite their apparent complexity, variety and ‘artful surfaces’ (Wark 2007), this 
reduction of any form of digital gameplay to interaction with algorithms sug- 
gests that the nature of learning that takes place is ultimately reduced to a form of 
algorithmic mastery. As Galloway (2006, p. 90-91) continues, “To play the game 
means to play the code of the game. 
To win means to know the system. And thus 
to interpret a game means to interpret its algorithm 
. 
. 
. to discover its parallel 
‘allegorithm’”. In this sense, playing a digital game could be seen as little more 
than a matter of “learning, internalizing and becoming intimate with a massive, 
multipart, global algorithm” (ibid.). 
This suggestion that digital games explicitly condition players to accept an un- 
derlying dominant value of algorithmic control — what Bogost (2008) terms ‘pro- 
cedurality’ — infers a correspondence between games playing and political control. 
In this sense a connection can be made between digital games and Deleuze’s no- 
tion of ‘control societies’ — the late twentieth-century successors to the modernist 
‘discipline societies’, which rely on systems of ‘free-floating control’ that are increas- 
ingly based around immaterial forms. As Alexander Galloway (2006, p. 90) writes, 
“video games don’t attempt to hide informatics control — they flaunt it”. These 
systems of control implicit within digital games include an emphasis on apparent 
flexibility in the manner in which the player is able to interact with the variables 
within a game. For critics such as Galloway, flexibility is a key aspect of informatic 
contro! — allowing systems to adjust and compensate for differences in individual 
actions, albeit via restricted forms of bounded ‘menu-driven’ choices. This flex- 
ibility allows systems to subsuine greater numbers of users and eventually to make 
all equivalent in the form of a mass universal standardization. 
Thus, it could be 
argued that digital games convey the dominant values, practices and logics of liv- 
ing within the conditions of a control society and orientating one’s action around 
the requirements of the algorithm. 
Ill. Digital Games and the Commodification of Learning 
A further critical caveat to the increased use of digital games in educational set- 
tings is the commodification of action inherent in most — if not all — digital games. 
As has already been noted, most digital games are based around specific ‘econo- 
mies’ that offer a balance of rewards and penalties (Buckingham 2006). The intro- 
duction of this logic into educational practices, it could be argued, extenuates the 
framing of learning as a commodity that can be quantifiably valued, competed for 
and exchanged. In an educational context, therefore, digital games could be seen 
as introducing “a pedagogical frame which insinuates players into an environment 
which both links consumption with freedom and choice and naturalizes play as 
a commodity” (Apperley 2009, p. 48). Of course a logic of reward, measurement 

=== PAGE 115 ===
Distrusting ‘Games’ Technologies in Education 
101 
and competition is not unique to the use of games in education, but has been a 
long-standing element of classroom organization and control. Nevertheless, digital 
games certainly extend and intensify its presence in education, as well as expressing 
learning in overtly value-based and market-driven terms. 
These features are perhaps most evident in the ‘gamification’ of educational pro- 
cesses, with the emphasis on point scoring, leader boards and badges to structure 
action and signify progress. While these may appear to be innovative processes, there 
has been much criticism of these aspects of gamification from within the games 
community. Bogost (2011), for example, contends that gamification privileges some 
of the most visible but least important elements of digital games, resulting in the use 
of “empty metrics’. Margaret Robertson (2010) has also critiqued what she sees as 
the reductionist process of regarding all actions with points and increased personal 
scores — what she characterized as a ‘pointsification’ of everything. As these com- 
ments suggest, gamification could be seen as leading to a degradation of educational 
interactions through the assigning of meaningless exchange values and the mainte- 
nance of a false sense of individual gain rather than collective endeavour: 
Gamification proposes to replace real incentives with fictional ones. Real 
incentives come at a cost but provide value for both parties based on a re- 
lationship of trust. By contrast, pretend incentives reduce or eliminate costs, 
but in so doing they strip away both value and trust. 
(Bogost 2011, n.p.) 
This commodification of action and interaction is also evident in the increas- 
ing privileging of ‘symbolic consumerism’ within many contemporary forms of 
digital gaming — that is, the purchasing of virtual goods within games in order 
to progress. This has long been apparent within multiplayer role-playing games 
and online game worlds. For example, multiplayer role-playing games “tend to 
be dominated by market exchange” (Dyer-Witheford & de Peuter 2009, p. 137) 
with activity centred around the exchange of virtual currencies allowing play- 
ers to acquire goods, spells, weapons, health and vitality. The significance of ‘play 
money’ (Dibbell 2006) to the successful playing of these games has translated 
into real-life economic activity — not least the practice of virtual game dollars 
being traded for real-life dollars. 
The symbolic purchase of digital goods is also a 
key element of many of the ‘social games’ played through social networks. Here 
various forms of playful consumerism are encouraged, as players take the role of 
‘ludic shoppers’ — “mak[ing] real their consumer fantasies through ludic means, 
by symbolically purchasing items they might not afford in the physical world” 
(Silva 2012, p. 4). As Silva (2012) suggests rather unconvincingly, the symbolic 
purchase of virtual goods could be seen to provide specific forms of ‘enjoyment’ 
such as the integration of consumption into one’s own identity, the classification 
of one’s self in relation to relevant others and the stimulation of strong personal 
emotions aroused through consumption. 

=== PAGE 116 ===
102 
Distrusting ‘Games’ Technologies in Education 
Of course, a strong counterargument can be made that the increased position- 
ing of digital gameplay within a framework of consumerism and commercial 
market-driven logic clearly has a bearing on the nature of any educational and 
learning practices that are being supported through digital games. In particular, 
this could be seen as subsuming any playful, experimental or creative activities 
into the system of consumption that lies at the heart of many games, and allow- 
ing learning to find expression only within monetized and individually com- 
petitive forms. Indeed, the reality of game-based learning and education within a 
commodified competitive logic was highlighted in a recent study by Harviainen, 
Lainema and Saarinen (2012), examining how individuals approached the act of 
educational gameplay. These findings point towards a diminished set of dispo- 
sitions and motivations amongst game-based learners. For example, a sense of 
what the researchers described as ‘excessive competitiveness’ was found between 
individuals regardless of any instructions to be noncompetitive. Moreover, the 
ultimately inconsequential nature of game-based interactions and actions led indi- 
viduals to hold ‘unrealistic’ levels of trust in other players coupled with a tendency 
to take ‘unnatural risks’. These behaviours were coupled with a heightened ten- 
dency for what the authors termed ‘outright cheating’. As Harviainen et al. (2012, 
p. 9) concluded, “there therefore exists the idea that everyone is willing to do what 
it takes to win, even if the simulation-game is not framed as a competition. 
This 
makes dishonesty seem normal”. 
IV. Digital Games and the Imbrication of 
| 
Education Into the System of Capital 
A final set of critical observations relates to the underlying alignment between the 
educational application of digital games and the economic needs of capitalism. 
This further challenges the notion of digital games as somehow being ‘apart’ from 
the nondigital ‘real world’, and locates games playing as situated within dom- 
inant economic and political contexts of capitalist society. As Dyer-Witheford 
and de Peuter (2009, p. xxvi) contend, we cannot ignore “the political and eco- 
nomic contexts of virtual games, skipping lightly over the conditions of paid and 
unpaid labour in game production, re-inscribing platitudes about the informa- 
tion age jobs that gamers are training themselves for, and failing to raise awkward 
questions about the global order for which gamers are now the new model of 
empowered participants”. As this deceptively brief list of issues implies, there are 
perhaps various ways in which digital games are related to the differential pattern- 
ing of economic power. As the authors write, “A media that once seemed all fun 
is increasingly revealing itself'as a school for labour, an instrument of rulership, and 
a laboratory for the fantasies of advanced techno-capital” (ibid., p. xix). 
Digital games could be seen as an important site for the increased integration 
of formal and informal education into the labour cycle — not least in terms of 
providing preparation for the forms of labour most prevalent in the immaterial 
economy. Indeed, it could be argued that a number of key production processes 

=== PAGE 117 ===
Distrusting ‘Games’ Technologies in Education 
103 
are extended into educational practice through the use of digital games. On one 
hand, a regulated sense of play and playfulness is seen as an increasingly impor- 
tant creative disposition and skill to be displayed in the immaterial workplace. As 
Nelson (2012) observes, the increased use of games in education has parallels with 
the trends in 1990s’ and 2000s’ American corporate culture towards the ‘game- 
ful workplace’ and the reimagining of the workplace as a more fun and playful 
(and therefore more efficient and harmonious) setting (Nelson 2012). Conversely, 
games also relate directly to what Krapp (2011) terms the ability to adjust to ‘the 
grind’ of productive modes of gameplay, characterized by competitiveness, repeti- 
tion and persistence, multitasking, problem solving and contingency planning. 
Digital gameplay can also be seen as a constant process of dense informa- 
tion processing, thereby preparing players for similar forms of informational and 
symbolic labour. As Garite (2003, n.p.) observes, “When we strip away the par- 
ticulars of content, gaming is essentially an aestheticized mode of information 
processing, and therefore the digital economy’s ideal form of leisure”. When 
transferred into educational contexts, digital games can be seen as supporting 
the development of a number of flexible dispositions, subjectivities and identi- 
ties appropriate for the immaterial workplace. In this sense, the requirement 
of games players to assume the identities of “citizen-soldiers, free-agent work- 
ers, cyborg adventurers, and corporate criminals” (Dyer-Witheford & de Peu- 
ter 2009, p. xxix) could be seen largely as preparation for later work roles and 
neo-liberal dispositions, rather than completely fantastical role play. As Galloway 
(2012, p. 44) observed of World of Warcraft, “At root, the game is not simply a fan- 
tasy landscape of dragons and epic weapons but a factory floor, an information- 
age sweatshop, custom tailored in every detail for cooperative ludic labour”. In all 
these ways, then, the use of digital games in educational contexts can be seen as 
entwined with the needs and expectations of the digital workplace. As Apperley 
(2009, p. 48) concludes, 
This eurhythmia between work and play foregrounds the tole of digital 
game play as a site of training for work in the knowledge economy, not 
necessarily in direct application, but in terms of approach, attitude, initiative 
and procedure. 
Conclusions 
This chapter has considered how a powerful orthodoxy has developed around the 
use of digital games in education, framing these technologies as ‘bringing in’ dy- 
namic learning practices and dispositions from outside of traditional educational 
contexts. Games playing is clearly a form of digital technology use that is appeal- 
ing to educationalists in a variety of ways. Indeed, the prospect of better aligning 
educational engagement with characteristics of ‘fun’ and ‘flow’ has proved under- 
standably seductive within educational contexts. Yet, as this chapter has suggested, 
there are a number of reasons to distrust the increased use of digital games in 

=== PAGE 118 ===
104 
Distrusting ‘Games’ Technologies in Education 
education. In particular it can be argued that even the most complex digital games 
act to reduce individual action to a limited set of predetermined possibilities. Most 
learning that takes place within a digital game might be more accurately described 
as supporting repetitive adjustments to the rules, rhythms and expectations of the 
game design, rather than genuinely educational engagement. 
Moreover, there are good grounds to conclude that “the work of video games 
[is to] define and reconstitute players as subjects of ideology” (Garite 2003, n.p.). 
As this chapter has contended, digital games could be said to rationalise the ac- 
tions of games players around a diminished set of values and imperatives that pro- 
mote competitive and commodified behaviour, the primacy of the self-directed 
and self-driven individual working within dense informatics environments and 
algorithmic structures. These tendencies of control and rationalization therefore 
support the wider argument that “in their structure and content, computer games 
are a capitalist and deeply conservative form of culture” (Stallabrass 1996, p. 107). 
Alternatively, as Galloway (2006, p. 91) puts it, “video games are, at their structural 
core, in direct synchronization with the political realities of the informatics age”. 
To argue that digital games constitute forms of educational engagement that are 
simply more ‘fun’ and ‘enjoyable’ is to overlook their inherent connection with 
dominant forms of ideological control. 
Of course, these limitations have not gone completely unrecognised by some 
critical games scholars — yet it remains rare for sustained challenges to the educa- 
tional use of digital games to be made along these lines. Some critically minded 
authors point to the educational potential that ‘exists around nonconventional 
modes of playing against the expectations and requirements of digital games. As 
Apperley (2009) concludes, there are a variety of forms of resistant behaviour 
that can be directed against the rationalization and control associated with con- 
ventional forms of gameplay that could be seen to have educational merit. The 
practice of ‘machinima’ (the act of creating three-dimensional animations in real 
time using computer games) and other forms of digital game art have also been 
welcomed by some critical scholars as progressive reconfigurations of the nature 
and form of digital gaming. Similarly, the transgressive act of modifying digital 
games (the practice of ‘modding’) is seen as a potentially productive means of re- 
asserting the power of the games player and going some ways towards counteract- 
ing the dominant ideologies and values inherent in games design. From another 
perspective, Bogost (2008) points to the development of activist games that can 
support players in interrogating dominant values and ideologies. 
Yet, as seductive 
as these alternative digital games practices might be in the eyes of critical scholars, 
they do little to redress the economic rationalization and disempowerment that 
characterizes the majority of games players’ experiences of digital games. Even in 
their most sophisticated ‘high art’ and ‘high technology’ forms, it could be con- 
tended that digital games do little more than “broker high neoliberalism” (Miller 
2011, p. 236). In this sense, the use of digital games in education is decidedly less 
‘other-worldly’ and straightforwardly ‘fun’ than it might first appear. 

=== PAGE 119 ===
6 
DISTRUSTING ‘SOCIAL’ 
TECHNOLOGIES IN EDUCATION 
introduction 
Just as games and gaming are an important part of the relatively short history of 
digital technology, the rise of ‘social media’ has been a key recent aspect of tech- 
nological development. While it is important to acknowledge that ‘“‘the web has 
always been social” (Halpin & Tuffield 2010, n.p.), the internet has certainly un- 
dergone an intensified ‘social turn’ over the past 10 years, to the point where social 
media are an integral element of how digital technologies are now encountered 
and used by many people. As Vincent Miller (2011, p. 208) describes it, the devel- 
opment of digital media and technology during the 2000s can be seen as “a kind 
of social ‘big bang’ leading to an expanded social universe”’. Tellingly, the notion 
of ‘social’ media is now a prevailing element of commercial IT industry activities. 
As Facebook founder Mark Zuckerberg (2010, n.p.) boasted at the turn of the 
decade, “We are building toward a web where the default is social”. Social media, 
it would seem, now lie at the heart of how digital technology is used across many 
aspects of contemporary society and, it follows, require sustained critical attention 
from the educational community. 
Unpacking the Key Features and Underlying 
Philosophies of Social Media 
The general idea of ‘social media’ has certainly permeated the popular conscious- 
ness over the past five years or so. Even the most casual of internet users will 
be now aware of ‘social network’ sites and ‘blogs’, maybe even ‘wikis’ and ‘vir- 
tual worlds’. It is also likely that most internet non-users will be aware of these 
developments, with traditional forms of print and broadcast media now making 

=== PAGE 120 ===
106 
Distrusting ‘Social’ Technologies in Education 
sustained reference to — and use of — social media applications such as Facebook, 
Twitter, YouTube and Wikipedia. In fact, since being declared Time magazine’s 
‘Person of the Year’ at the end of 2006, social media have come to dominate the 
ways in which digital technology is now framed and understood around the world. 
Of course, as with many digital technology developments, the constituent ele- 
ments of social media are evolving continually. Indeed, as the 2000s progressed, 
social media often appeared to be an area of digital media that was changing pace 
faster than most — with seemingly dominant mass-use applications falling quickly 
out of favour, only to be replaced by what appeared to be even more dominant 
successors. Who in 2005 would have predicted the rapid decline of Myspace? 
Conversely, who now would be confident enough to assume the continued suc- 
cess of currently popular applications such as Twitter and Facebook, or their re- 
cent counterparts such as Instagram or Pinterest? It is also important to recognise 
the distinct geographical and cultural variations within the global adoption of 
social media. For example, whereas people in North America may well be log- 
ging on to Facebook and Twitter, Chinese users are more likely to be accessing 
sites such as QZone and Weibo. Social media is certainly a fast-changing, ever- 
evolving and ever-fragmenting area of the digital landscape. 
This mercurial nature notwithstanding, a common set of principles and under- 
lying philosophies can nevertheless be said to define social media. As such, social 
media can be understood as internet applications that rely on openly shared digital 
content that is authored, critiqued and reconfigured by a mass of users. Social media 
applications, therefore, are those that allow users to’engage in a number of specific 
online activities: conversing and interacting with others; creating, editing and shar- 
ing textual, visual and audio content; and categorizing, labelling and recommend- 
ing existing forms of content. Perhaps the key underlying characteristics of any 
social media practice are that of ‘mass socialization’ and ‘mass participation’ — that is, 
harnessing the power of the collective actions of online user communities rather 
than the disparate efforts of individuals, with internet-based actions therefore being 
“driven by social connections and user participation” (Song 2010, p. 249). 
The growth of social media along these lines has transformed the ways in 
which the internet is experienced by most ‘end users’. Now the internet no 
longer functions primarily as a one-way, linear delivery system where a mass of 
individuals each independently downloads data, information and other resources 
that have been produced by a relatively small number of elite content providers. 
Instead, the internet is seen as now driven by (and to some extent determined 
through) the activities of its mass of users — what has been described as ‘many-to- 
many’ rather than ‘one-to-many’ transmission (O’Reilly 2005). The ‘social media’ 
era of internet use is therefore understood as being arranged along substantially 
different lines than the preceding ‘cyberspace’ era of the 1990s and 2000s. For 
example, in contrast to the ‘broadcast’ mode of information exchange that char- 
acterized internet use during the 1990s and early 2000s, the web applications 
of the past 10 years are seen as relying on openly shared digital content that is 
authored, critiqued and reconfigured by a mass of users. In this sense, YouTube 

=== PAGE 121 ===
Distrusting ‘Social’ Technologies in Education 
107 
does not simply represent a website where an individual user can access and watch 
videos. Instead, YouTube is a site where people share video content with others, 
form like-minded groups, communicate with others, comment on and react to 
others’ work, and re-create and re-edit existing work. 
As such, the significance of 
a social media application such as YouTube stems from its function as a social and 
participatory space, reflecting the growing importance that is being placed on 
interaction between and within groups of internet users. 
The implications of this user-led, collective ethos are conveyed in the language 
used to describe social media applications. For example, social media use is often 
described in terms of ‘collaboration’, ‘creativity’ and ‘conviviality’. Social media 
applications are seen as ‘open’ rather than ‘closed’, ‘bottom-up’ rather than ‘top- 
down’. Individual social media users are no longer simply passive recipients of 
content, but involved in the mutual ‘cocreation’ of online content and activities. 
As the hybrid labels of ‘prosumer’ and ‘produser’ imply, the agency of individuals 
who engage with social media is seen as moving between categories of being a 
‘producer’ or ‘consumer’, and ‘amateur’ or ‘professional’. Indeed, social media are 
seen as reducing authoritarian control and, instead, democratising production and 
consumption processes. This is not to say that social media are simply more active 
versions of previously passive forms of internet use. 
As Felicia Song (2010, p. 253) 
observes, users’ engagement with social media now “often involves complex dy- 
namics concerning authority, expertise, and individualism”. This can be seen in 
many of the activities and practices that now surround the use of online content. 
Social media users are described as going online to ‘share’ and ‘rate’, ‘mash up’ 
and ‘remix’, ‘friend’ and ‘trend’. In many ways these are all activities that can be 
described as ‘archival processing’ — that is, “sharing content, making connections, 
ranking cultural artefacts and producing digital content” (Gehl 2012, p. 1228). 
The ways in which the internet is now encountered and experienced are 
therefore very different to that of 10 years earlier. This explains, at least in part, 
the enthusiasm during the mid-2000s for the “Web 2.0’ label to emphasise the 
significant ‘step-change’ and ‘upheaval’ in the ways that the internet was being 
experienced by users of social media applications and tools (Crook 2012). Of 
course, as many Computer scientists were quick to point out at the time, most of 
the apparently ‘new’ characteristics of ‘web 2.0’ had been in existence long be- 
fore the advent of Facebook, Twitter or even the first social network sites such as 
SixDegrees. Indeed, internet applications since the early 1970s had been allowing 
users to exchange messages with each other, maintain personal profiles, curate lists 
of ‘friends’ and write blog-like journal entries. Yet, while the technical necessity 
of rebranding and reversioning the internet ‘2.0’ was been rightly questioned and 
has now fallen out of favour, the current generation of social media applications 
is undeniably distinct from earlier forms of internet use — if only in terms of the 
scale of their use. Indeed, contemporary social media are used by hundreds of 
millions of users (in the case of Facebook a figure that surpassed one billion ac- 
counts in 2012). As such, the social media of the 2010s can be said to now boast a 
sufficient critical mass of users and applications to be of genuine collective benefit 

=== PAGE 122 ===
108 
Distrusting ‘Social’ Technologies in Education 
and social significance. As Christakis and Fowler (2009, p. 30) conclude, 
“As part 
of a social network, we transcend ourselves for good or ill, and become a part of 
something much larger”. 
This latter quotation goes some way to capturing the underlying principles and 
values that many commentators see as marking the significance of the recent turn 
towards social media. These can be described as centred on the values of infor- 
mality, individuality and collectivism. In this first instance, much of the perceived 
technical and social significance of social media tools and applications stems from 
their informality — that is, the seemingly routine and mundane ‘personal’ activities 
that social media applications and tools support users in doing. In particular, social 
media have proved to be the key means of supporting and facilitating what could be 
described colloquially as the ‘nuts and bolts’ of social life. This includes various 
forms of social interaction, presentation of self and social grooming — what Mimi 
Ito et al. (2009) describe as ‘hanging out’ and ‘messing around’. Of course, despite 
their initial appearance it would be a mistake to dismiss the apparent mundanity 
of these social media—based practices as inconsequential and trivial. Instead it 
is precisely these mundane aspects of social media—based activity — what Shirky 
(2008, p. 86) terms “the ordinary stuff of life” — that underlie its influence on so- 
ciety. Indeed, through social media these activities, processes and practices are now 
played out on a “more open, personalized, participative and social” scale than was 
ever possible before (Ravenscroft 2009, p. 1). 
This significance of the informal and the personal aspects of social media—based 
activity corresponds with the individualism and communitarianism of action that 
social media are believed to support and stimulate: On the one hand, much of the 
significance of social media is seen as stemming from being individually driven 
and individually empowering. For example, the notion of ‘DIY’ (do-it-yourself) is 
seen as a key philosophy of social media use, reflecting the ability of these applica- 
tions and tools to decentralise power to the individual user. Yet this individualism is 
understood to be of most value in a collective, cumulative sense — that is, as the ac- 
tions of individuals are aggregated and amplified into groups and ‘communities’ of 
users. One prominent justification offered in support of this collective significance 
of social media is Yochai Benkler’s (2006) explanation of the ‘wealth of networks’. 
In this sense social media are seen as enabling particularly powerful forms of 
market-led social production and sharing of information and content. Thus, de- 
pending on your point of view, the power of social media can be seen as centring 
either on a communal form of individualization or on distinctly individualized 
forms of community. Either way, as Song (2010, p. 268) reminds us, social media 
need to be seen as supporting “structural spaces that are in dialectical relationship 
with the normative cultural ideals about community and individualism”, 
The Rise of Educational Interest in Social Media 
As these brief outlines imply, the significance of social media does not lie in the 
technical capabilities and functions of specific tools and applications. Instead, the 

=== PAGE 123 ===
Distrusting ‘Social’ Technologies in Education 
109 
significance of the notion of ‘social media’ lies primarily in its resonance with 
a set of wider contemporary societal concerns and cultural ideals. Indeed, the 
ideals of collaboration, sharing, individualism and collective empowerment as- 
sociated with social media chime with a range of recent social, political, cultural 
and economic developments. As such, the character of social media is aligned 
with a number of issues central to how the character of society is seen by many 
people as being reformed and recast. Thus much of the appeal and allure of social 
media derives from its mirroring of much of what we believe contemporary 
social life to be becoming. For example, the hyperconnected, instantaneous, indi- 
vidualized and promiscuous nature of social media could certainly be argued to 
mirror Ongoing shifts towards what has been variously described as the network 
society, liquid age or post/late modern society. Social media can be seen as fit- 
ting perfectly with the fluid concerns of the current post-industrial era, and as- 
sociated recasting of the hierarchical and fixed boundaries and structures of the 
twentieth-century late industrial era. Indeed, the prominence of social media in 
popular consciousness is now intertwined with many of the dominant societal 
concerns of recent times. These range from the most prosaic of issues (such as 
the role of social media in perpetrating celebrity culture) to the most politically 
significant of issues (such as the role of social media in mobilizing popular revolts 
within countries such as Egypt and Libya). In both these extremes, social media 
can be seen as both driven by and itself driving wider contemporary societal and 
cultural change. 
Thus to return to the specific question of this book, the educational significance 
of social media should be seen as similarly corresponding with a range of wider 
contemporary concerns, hopes and fears over the changing nature of educational 
provision and practice in contemporary society. Indeed, the promises of educa- 
tional improvement and transformation associated with different social media 
practices have, in the minds of many educational technologists, coalesced into a 
powerful overall imperative for change. This imperative can be said to be based 
largely around a perceived set of educational benefits that derive from the com- 
mon characteristics and principles associated with social media use — most nota- 
bly principles of community, collaboration, sharing and an overall freeing-up and 
democratization of action. While the applications and tools may themselves be 
diverse in form and function, many educational technologists have been enthused 
by the implications for education practice and provision arising from a general 
‘spirit’ of social media use in education settings. 
Forms of Social Media Use in Education 
Social media tools and applications are now prominent aspects of digital technol- 
ogy use across all sectors and forms of educational activity. 
Numerous examples of 
social media use can now be found in the day-to-day activities of schools, colleges, 
universities and other formal educational settings. Many institutions are striving to 
develop ways of using popular forms of social media to support these ‘new forms 

=== PAGE 124 ===
110 
Distrusting ‘Social’ Technologies in Education 
of learning’ — such as using Facebook as an alternative ‘learning management sys- 
tem’, using virtual worlds such as Second Life as alternative learning spaces, and 
allowing students to communicate in class via microblogging services such as 
Twitter (see Wang, Woo, Quek, Yang & Liu 2012; Elansky, Mislan & Elavsky 2011; 
Conole & Alevizou 2010). 
There is growing support for redesigning the nature of educational institutions 
along social media—led lines. From what can be termed a ‘reschooling’ perspec- 
tive, many educators maintain that the hyperindividualized and informalized ex- 
cesses of social media can be tamed to support the provision of what Goodyear 
and Ellis (2008) term ‘serious student-centred learning’ within the institutional- 
ized boundaries of schools, colleges and universities. Of course, even the most 
structured implementation of social media in formal classroom settings implies 
a degree of ‘user-driven’ education — that is, allowing learners to take more ac- 
tive roles in what they learn as well as how and when they learn it. Nevertheless, 
many educators believe that traditional educational institutions are fully capable 
of accommodating (and consequently benefiting from) these shifts in emphases. 
Some commentators have therefore begun to talk of how best to redesign edu- 
cation provision along more fluid and collaborative lines in order to exploit the 
educational potentials of social media. Persuasive arguments have been advanced 
for the technological (re)engagement and (re)empowerment of learners through 
the establishment of ‘school 2.0’, ‘education 2.0’, ‘pedagogy 2.0’ and even ‘life- 
long learning 2.0’ (Rosenfeld 2007; Wang & Chern 2008; Lee & McLoughlin 
2010). Demands continue to be made for the radical rethinking of the processes 
and practices of contemporary education institutions — as evident in calls for the 
introduction of ‘remix curricula’ and ‘pedagogical mash-ups’ (e.g., Fisher & Baird 
2009). For better or worse, the concept of social media has had a pronounced 
influence on the ways in which educational institutions have been (re)imagined 
and (re)approached by education commentators and stakeholders over the past 
10 years or so. 
One of the prevailing aspects of social media use in education is therefore 
seen as an inherent imperative for change. However, rather than simply integrat- 
ing existing social media into and around educational institutions, it is beginning 
increasingly to be argued that social media conveys an imperative for more radical 
change. As Tapscott and Williams (2010, p. 10) contend with respect to the use of 
social media in higher education, 
Change is required in two vast and interwoven domains that permeate the 
deep structures and operating model of the university: (1) the value created 
for the main customers of the university (the students); and (2) the model 
of production for how that value is created. First we need to toss out the 
old industrial model of pedagogy (how learning is accomplished) and re- 
place it with a new model called collaborative learning. Second we need 
an entirely new modus operandi for how the subject matter, course materials, 

=== PAGE 125 ===
Distrusting ‘Social’ Technologies in Education 
111 
texts, written and spoken word, and other media (the content of higher 
education) are created. 
In this sense, many educators see social media as supporting the negation of 
institutionally provided learning altogether. At present, a number of high-profile 
and well-supported trends in social media—supported learning are positioned de- 
fiantly outside of the formal education system. Much has been made, for example, 
of the growth of social media platforms where communities of learners can ac- 
cess professional-grade learning content and courseware such as YouTubeEDU, 
iTunes. 
U, TED-Ed and Academic Earth. While many prestigious educational in- 
stitutions and educators are involved in the provision of this content, at present 
many of these spaces are, at best, analogous to more formal modes of institutional- 
ized education provision and based, instead, around altruistic social networking 
principles. 
Of course, as has been implied earlier, many other educationalists see social 
media as leading to more radical rearrangements of educational provision. From 
this ‘deschooling’ perspective, therefore, comes a more radical set of understand- 
ings. Here commentators see social media as offering opportunities for the com- 
plete redesign and reorientation of education provision. Social media are therefore 
seen as a means to infuse educational provision with the vibrancy and fluidity 
that can be found within the ‘virtual adolescent cultures’ of social media as op- 
posed to less dynamic ‘formal school settings’ (Schuck & Aubusson 2010). Grow- 
ing numbers of educationalists are now predicting the diminishment or even 
complete disappearance of the educational institution in favour of technology- 
supported collective learning (Downes 2010). 
As Russell Francis (2010, p. 7) rea- 
sons with regard to elite forms of higher education provision, “We have indeed 
entered a period of profound and historic change in the culture of higher educa- 
tion that requires us to reconceptualise how, why, where and with whom learning 
takes place’. Similar arguments have been made for the reconstitution of most 
other forms of compulsory and postcompulsory education. Social media, it would 
appear, have proved to be a ready platform upon which to reimagine totally the 
nature and form of most educational processes and practices. 
Perceived Benefits of Social Media in Education 
There are, of course, 
a number of obvious connections between the principles 
of social media use and current understandings of desirable forms of learning. In 
this sense, much attention has been paid to the personalized and socially situated 
forms of learning that can accrue from social media activities. For example, the 
participatory experiences implicit in the online coconstruction of content are 
seen as mirroring current assumptions amongst educational experts that learning 
is an inherently social process that best takes place within interactions between 
groups of learners involved in the creation as well as consumption of knowledge 

=== PAGE 126 ===
112 
Distrusting ‘Social’ Technologies in Education 
(e.g., Lameras, Paraskakis & Levy 2009). For many educational technologists, 
therefore, social media are imbued with a range of inherently educational char- 
acteristics, supporting idealized teaching and learning practices such as inquiry 
learning, communities of practice and the multimodal nature of intelligence 
(Crook 2012). Often these benefits of cooperative and collaborative forms of 
learning are contrasted against the deficiencies of ‘transmission’ models of instruc- 
tion (C. Jones 2011). 
In particular, the framing of social media use around participatory and collab- 
orative group activity is seen as fitting well with contemporary constructivist and 
sociocultural accounts where knowledge is constructed actively by learners within 
supportive communal social settings. Social media applications are therefore seen 
as having many of the constituent characteristics of constructivist learning envi- 
ronments, not least supporting actions that are active, collaborative, conversational, 
complex and reflective (cf. Jonassen 1999). A central aspect of social constructivist 
models is that learning often takes place outside of formally structured educational 
provision — therefore mirroring the informal nature of much social media use. 
Mimi Ito and colleagues, for example, identified a set of different genres of social 
media—based participation, all of which can be said to involve elements of learning. 
For instance, at a basic level is the popular practice of using social media to simply 
‘hang out’ with others (see Ito et al. 2009). Often these forms of ‘hanging out’ can 
spill over into the more focused engagement of what Ito terms ‘messing around’ — 
that is, activities that are interest-driven and more centred on peer sociability, per- 
haps involving fortuitous searching, experimentation and playing with resources. 
Sometimes these instances of messing around cam lead to the more intense com- 
mitment of what Ito terms ‘geeking out’. These are seen as bouts of concentrated 
and intense participation within defined communities of like-minded and similarly 
interested individuals driven by common and often specialized interests. 
All these latter examples imply significant changes in the nature of individuals’ 
relationships with information and knowledge through social media. Indeed it 
has been argued that social media support forms of knowledge consumption 
and knowledge construction that are very different to the epistemological prin- 
ciples of formal education and individualized instruction. These differences are 
encapsulated, for example, in Thomas and Seely-Brown’s (2011) celebration of a 
digitally enhanced ‘new culture of learning’ — that is, learning that is based around 
principles of collective exploration, play and innovation rather than individual- 
ized instruction. 
The changing relationships that social media users appear to have 
with information have even prompted some educationalists to fundamentally re- 
assess the nature of learning. Take, for instance, the increasingly popular notion 
of ‘connectivism’ — that is, the idea that social media—based learning centres now 
have the ability to access and use distributed information on a ‘just-in-time’ 
basis. From this perspective, learning can be seen as an individual’s ability to con- 
nect to specialized information nodes and sources as and when required. Thus 
being ‘knowledgeable’ can be seen as the ability to nurture and maintain these 

=== PAGE 127 ===
Distrusting ‘Social’ Technologies in Education 
113 
connections (see Chatti, Amine & Quix 2010). As George Siemens (2004, n.p.) 
puts it, learning can therefore be conceived in terms of the “capacity to know 
more” via social media rather than a reliance on the individual accumulation and 
cognitive retention of prior knowledge in terms of “what is currently known”. 
Aside from the learning benefits of social media use, it is now argued that social 
media tools offer improved means of engaging different types of individuals in 
education and learning. Often these benefits are portrayed in distinct generational 
terms, with commentators pointing to incoming cohorts of younger learners who 
have been “born into a world woven from cabled, wired or wireless connectiv- 
ity” (Bauman 2010, p. 7). For many educators, therefore, the increased presence 
of social media in educational settings is seen as enabling educational institutions 
to (re)connect with individuals who are “used to networking; its members work 
collaboratively, they execute several tasks simultaneously, and they use the web to 
acquire knowledge” (Ulbrich, Jahnke & Mortensson 2010, p. i). As Mason and 
Rennie (2007, p. 199) conclude, “Shared community spaces and intergroup com- 
munications are a massive part of what excites young people and therefore should 
contribute to [their] persistence and motivation to learn”’. 
These expectations of enhanced motivation and interest are often accompa- 
nied by a belief that social media can enhance equality of educational opportu- 
nity and outcome. As Solomon and Schrum (2007, p. 8) reasoned soon after the 
mainstream emergence of Facebook and Wikipedia, “Everyone can participate 
thanks to social networking and collaborative tools and the abundance of web 
2.0 sites 
... The web is no longer a one-way street where someone controls the 
content. Anyone can control content in a web 2.0 world”. This sentiment antici- 
pates the belief that now persists amongst many educators that social media allow 
learners to engage in learning activities that are more individually meaningful 
and more publicly significant than was possible before. As Willinsky reasons with 
regards to participatory engagement with an application such as Wikipedia, 
Today a student who makes the slightest correction to a Wikipedia article is 
contributing more to the state of public knowledge, in a matter of minutes, 
than I was able to do over the course of my entire grade school education, 
such as it was. 
(2009, p. xiit) 
Statements such as these echo wider presumptions of an enhanced alignment 
between the provision of educational opportunities and the lifestyles of digitally 
attuned and digitally active learners. These alignments are seen as taking a number 
of forms, all allowing learning to be better integrated with the increased situat- 
ing of individuals’ everyday lives within online contexts. 
As such, learning can be 
more easily assimilated into what some commentators refer to as the ‘networked 
self’ (Papacharissi 2010). Key here is the more flexible, fluid and accelerated ways 
of being that social media provide for users. As such, many people see social 

=== PAGE 128 ===
114 
Distrusting ‘Social’ Technologies in Education 
media as associated with enhanced social autonomy — with social media users 
now accustomed to having increased control over the nature and form of what 
they do, as well as where, when and how they do it. Indeed, social media users are 
described as having an enhanced capacity to self-organize and provide for them- 
selves. As Tapscott and Williams (2010, p. 52) conclude, these individuals “are not 
content to be passive consumers, and increasingly satisfy their desire for choice, 
convenience, customization, and control by designing, producing, and distributing 
products themselves”. 
Popular Criticisms of Social Media in Education 
Despite their high profile, social media have attracted a number of counterclaims 
and criticisms from those arguing against their educational and intellectual merits. 
These criticisms range from the heightened educational disengagement, alien- 
ation and disconnection of social media—using students to the detrimental effect 
that social media tools may have on ‘traditional’ skills and literacies. Early fears 
abounded within some sections of the education community that social media 
tools could contribute to the intellectual and scholarly de-powering of a ‘Google 
generation’ of learners incapable of independent critical thought, and generally 
hasten what Ziegler (2007, p. 69) termed “the mis-education of Generation M”. 
For instance, in contrast to the popular positioning of social media applications 
such as social networking applications as exciting educational tools, some initial 
critics viewed them as distracting learners from their studies. As Cassidy (2006, n.p.) 
bemoaned, tools such as blogs and social networking applications could be said to 
serve merely “the essential purpose (for young people without jobs, families, and 
other social responsibilities) of seeing and being seen 
. . . [tapping into] the appar- 
ently timeless appeal to young people of just ‘hanging out’”. In this vein concerns 
were also raised over the contribution of social media tools to a distantiating of 
students from the offline realities of their formal education studies. As Bugeja 
(2006, n.p.) complained, students’ use of social media while physically at school or 
university could be seen as a potential ‘misuse’ of resources, with the educational 
institution in effect assisting students to disengage with their studies: 
Information in the classroom was supposed to bridge digital divides and 
enhance student research. Increasingly, however, our networks are being 
used to entertain members of ‘the Facebook Generation’ who text-message 
during class, talk on their cell phones during labs, and listen to iPods rather 
than guest speakers in the wireless lecture hall. 
Aside from augmenting alienation and disengagement, other commentators 
have pointed towards the contribution of social media use to “the development 
of a culture of disrespect” (Ziegler 2007) between students and formal educa- 
tion providers. News media report regularly on instances of school and univer- 
sity students being sanctioned for ‘inappropriate’ use of social media in ways that 

=== PAGE 129 ===
Distrusting ‘Social’ Technologies in Education 
115 
denigrate their educational institutions and/or teachers. In this sense concerns 
have been raised over the realignment of power within the learner/teacher re- 
lationship that social media technologies appear to foster, as apparent in web- 
sites such as ‘Ratemyprofessor’ and ‘Ratemyteachers’, or students posting candid 
mobile phone video excerpts of their teachers on video-sharing sites such as 
YouTube. While some commentators welcome the empowering nature of these 
technology practices, others in the educational establishment portray it in nega- 
tive terms — what a UK education minister termed at the time ‘the sinister down- 
side’ of modern technology (A. Johnson 2007). 
Arguments Against the Use of Social Media in Education 
As these latter examples suggest, social media is currently the focus for a number 
of long-running educational debates and controversies — not least the devaluing 
of state-provided education and erosion of public values and the continued vi- 
ability of schooling. Social media therefore leave educational technologists facing 
new variations on some long-standing questions — not least whether the rise to 
prominence of these technologies can recast education and learning in more dy- 
namic, desirable and democratic terms, or else is set to hasten the ‘dumbing-down’ 
of education and ‘turning-off’ of learners. Returning to the central themes of this 
book in terms of power, politics and ideological interests, however, there are a 
range of more substantial issues to also consider in assessing the educational value 
of social media. 
|. The Limits of Individual ‘Participation’ 
First is the contention that the majority of interactions with social media are not 
especially ‘participatory’ in nature. While undoubtedly of personal significance for 
the individuals who are involved directly, much of the activity and content sup- 
ported by social media remain “the ordinary stuff of life” rather than anything 
more powerful in terms of participatory forms of learning or knowledge creation 
(Shirky 2008). Although these ordinary activities and processes may well be es- 
sential aspects of social life, it would be a mistake to consider them of direct ‘edu- 
cational’ significance along commonsensical lines of “everything is education’ or 
‘everything is learning’. Informal learning is not simply ‘incidental’ learning that 
takes place as a matter of course throughout our daily lives. The informal learn- 
ing that educators are most concerned with when celebrating the educational 
potential of social media is learning with intent and purpose — the processes that 
Mimi Ito identifies as the relatively rare instances of ‘geeking out’ that lie beyond 
the act of simply ‘hanging out’ or ‘messing around’ online. Of course, social media 
are well capable of supporting specific instances of intentional, intensified, self- 
directed learning. Yet, as Ito’s research itself implies, these occasional instances of 
‘geeking out’ are located within far more frequent engagement in activities that 
could not be considered educationally productive. Thus it would be a mistake to 

=== PAGE 130 ===
116 
Distrusting ‘Social’ Technologies in Education 
conflate all social media use as educationally related or educationally productive. 
The acts of ‘hanging out’ and ‘messing around’ are not to be confused with — but 
may well be important prerequisites of — the processes of educational engagement. 
Moreover, it would be a mistake to assume that bouts of educational engagement 
result as a matter of course from these noneducational practices and activities. 
When individuals do enter the stage of ‘geeking out’ — and can therefore be said 
to be genuinely learning through social media — then this is dependent on a range 
of social factors, rather than any specific inherent quality of social media itself. 
These points relate to a fundamental contradiction in popular understandings 
of the educational potential of social media — that is, the shortfall between the 
rhetoric of mass socialization and active community-led action and the rather 
more individualized and passive realities of social media engagement by many 
users. Although growing numbers of educationalists and technologists view the 
participatory practices associated with social media use as leading to social forms of 
learning, there is currently little evidence that the majority of individuals use social 
media applications in especially participatory, interactive or even sociable ways. 
For example, despite their undoubted potential for communal activity, the most 
commonly used social media tools tend to be appropriated for the one-way pas- 
sive consumption of content. This is readily apparent in the ways that the majority 
of individuals engage with YouTube or Wikipedia to access existing content — 
approaching such applications in a ‘take-it-or-leave-it’ manner rather than the in- 
tended spirit of ‘make-it-and-leave-it’. In this sense the majority of social media 
users are more accurately described as recipients rather than participants. 
Indeed, internet usage statistics suggest that most social media applications rely 
on content (re)creation by a small proportion of users. For example, Wikipedia 
continues to depend heavily on a ‘small core’ of a few thousand ‘highly active par- 
ticipants’ (predominantly older, educated, North American males) who write and 
edit entries that are then consumed by an audience of millions of users (Leadbeater 
2008, p. 15). Recent studies continue to find that only ‘a few’ college-level students 
demonstrated in-depth knowledge or familiarity with Wikipedia editing processes 
(Menchen-Trevino & Hargittai 2011). Similarly, it is reckoned that three quarters 
of the ‘tweets’ on Twitter originate from just 5 per cent of the accounts, with 
nearly one quarter of tweets coming from automated bots and feeds, and “‘social 
media marketers far much more active than overall users” (Dean 2010, p. 99). Even 
the most generous of empirical studies confirm the presence of such imbalances 
within patterns of popular social media use and engagement. According to Van 
Dijck (2009), for example, it is possible to identify different levels of participation 
amongst social media users. Using categories from market research studies of social 
media use, these participatory states can be said to include the following: 
* — Active creators: People actually producing and uploading content such as blogs, 
videos or photos 
* — Critics: People who provide ratings or evaluations 

=== PAGE 131 ===
Distrusting ‘Social’ Technologies in Education 
117 
* — Collectors: Those who curate recommended links on social bookmarking ser- 
vices which can be shared with other users 
* 
Joiners: People who join social networking sites such as Facebook without 
necessarily contributing substantive content 
* — Passive spectators: People performing activities such as reading blogs or watch- 
ing peer-generated video 
* — 
Inactives 
Surveys and studies consistently report that the majority of social media users 
are positioned in what Van Dijck describes as the passive or inactive categories — a 
trend that certainly challenges the rhetoric of a ‘produsage generation’ of individu- 
als all learning through the cocreation and sharing of their own knowledge. 
At best, 
then, most social media ‘users’ would appear responsible mainly for the creation 
and sharing of personal ‘profiles’ and other personal information. In terms of the 
substantive creation of content, it would appear that the ‘open’ philosophy that lies 
at the heart of the social media ethos encourages a majority of people to choose to 
‘free-ride’ on the efforts of a minority. This reflects what economists term the ‘logic 
of collective action’ (Olson 1971). Put simply, this is the logic that not every indi- 
vidual needs to join a group in order to benefit from its collective action. As Mark 
Considine (2005, p. 199) describes, “If the benefit to be achieved cannot be local- 
ized to those responsible for achieving it, then it will be in the rational self-interest 
of the majority not to participate, and simply to let others put themselves out to 
press the case for change”. Again, the idea that some people will contribute — and 
therefore benefit — more than others is an accepted facet of the networked ‘market’ 
principles that underpin the logic of most social media action. Yet these inequalities 
are often overlooked or distorted in the framing of social media within educational 
debate as fully participative, democratic spaces where all contribute and benefit 
accordingly. 
Of course, for many social media advocates these patterns of minority activity 
and mass nonparticipation can be rationalized as ‘a predictable imbalance’ that 
actually serves to drive social media communities towards more efficient and 
improved outcomes (e.g., Shirky 2008). Yet such imbalances certainly contradict 
the central tenets of the educational expectations of mass participatory learning 
and sociocultural ‘authentic’ exchange. As such, it is clearly unrealistic to assume 
that the groups and networks of individuals supported through social media are 
comparable to the ‘learning communities’ or ‘communities of practice’ imagined 
by educational proponents of social media. Instead, these are looser, less commit- 
ted and less obliged groupings of individuals. Most participants in social media 
groupings are perhaps best classified as temporary clusters of individuals built 
around communal preferences in consumption or lifestyle rather than involving 
‘real’ action or meaningful, sustained engagement. 
Of course, some social media communities are undoubtedly productive for the 
minority of individuals who are most involved. For example, the core community 

=== PAGE 132 ===
118 
Distrusting ‘Social’ Technologies in Education 
of Wikipedia editors would seem to fit the description of an educationally ben- 
eficial ‘ethos-action community’ (Pentzold 2010). 
Yet communities such as these 
are rarely spontaneous, fully inclusive or even fully participatory. While Wikipedia 
may be experienced as a thriving community by one small group of ‘insiders’, it is 
much more often experienced as a distant repository by another larger group of 
‘outsiders’. Any consideration of the educational qualities of social media there- 
fore needs to recognise the transitory and contingent nature of online actions that 
are not underpinned by any lasting shared bond, obligation or lasting reciprocity. 
At best, then, social media could be described as what Bauman (2001, p. 50) de- 
scribes as ‘peg’ communities — that is, “a momentary gathering around a nail on 
which many solitary individuals hang their solitary individual fears”. In all these 
ways, it is difficult to marry the indifference or disconnection that character- 
izes the reality of much social media use with more interactive, communal-based 
rhetoric of social media—based learning. 
The suggestion that online collectives do not equate with conventional no- 
tions of community has been raised by many commentators over the past 20 years. 
Indeed, the notion of what Castells (2001) termed ‘networked individualism’ 
has long been criticized as lacking the durability, and obligation of ‘traditional’ 
face-to-face communities. As Bauman (2011, p. 92) observes, “Internet commu- 
nities 
.. 
. are composed and decomposed, enlarged or cut down to size, by the 
multiple acts of individual decisions and impulses to ‘connect’ and ‘disconnect’. 
They are therefore eminently changeable, fragile and incurably fissiparous’’. All 
these fragilities appear to be replicated — if not amplified — through social media. 
This point was made by Eli Pariser (2011, p. 21), drawing upon Puttnam’s notion 
of ‘bonding’ social capital between already existing groups as opposed to ‘bridg- 
ing’ social capital between different elements of communities: “We're getting a 
lot of bonding but very little bridging”. Pariser sees this discrepancy as significant, 
reasoning that ‘bridging’ capital is an essential component of “‘creat[ing] our sense 
of the ‘public’ — the space where we address the problems that transcend our nar- 
row self-interests” (ibid.). At best, then, social media can be seen as contributing 
to a limiting rather than broadening of horizons — what some technologists refer 
to a process of ‘hiving’ towards the similar. 
Allied to all these latter points is the dominant shaping of social media along 
individualized, market-driven and ultimately consumerist lines. Indeed, rather 
than functioning as sites of mass productivity and volunteerism, social tools and 
applications are first and foremost “mirrors of contemporary individualism” (Song 
2008, n.p.). In this sense, social media participation and productive activity can 
be seen as being led less by altruism than by individual gain. Social media should 
therefore be understood as operating along a market-led logic of individual (non) 
participation rather than a collectivist logic of communal benefit. This logic 
of (non)participation is reflected in Brabham’s (2010) study of participation in 
‘crowdsourcing’ applications, which suggests five dominant motivating factors for 
individuals who took part in such activities. All but one of these factors were 

=== PAGE 133 ===
Distrusting ‘Social’ Technologies in Education 
119 
focused on individual gain — with the most popular motivations including the 
‘addiction’ to approaching oneself as a meaningful actor and perceiving partici- 
pation as an opportunity to make money, develop one’s creative skills or seek 
freelance work. 
Il. The Tendency to Consume Rather Than Produce 
The tendency for nonparticipatory and nonproductive engagement with social 
media is perhaps unsurprising when one considers the role that social media play 
in supporting and strengthening the pattern and dynamics of consumerism and 
consumption. 
The rhetoric of ‘produsers’ and ‘prosumers’ should not distract from 
the fact that social media use remains focused within the prevailing logic of the 
consumer society. As such, social media do not alter the fact that we live “in 
a society in which consumers, not producers, are cast as the driving force of 
economic prosperity” (Bauman 2001, p. 74). Thus, despite the rhetoric of well- 
meaning technologists and educationalists, the blurring of boundaries between 
production and consumption that lies at the heart of most conceptions of social 
media is not necessarily accurate. 
The individual user of any social media appli- 
cation will still remain primarily a consumer. Moreover, the overall logic of the 
consumer relies on the individual being in an ambivalent state of always wanting 
to consume more. 
This is not to say that social media do not encourage production. Indeed, 
it could be argued that some degree of production is an essential part of using 
social media. As Mandiberg (2012, p. 1) reasons, “From the audience’s perspec- 
tive, in order to experience the site you have to become a media producer”. 
That said, it could be argued that social media encourage individual users to 
produce content only along bounded lines. More specifically, it can be argued 
that social media encourage individual users to produce only content that is of 
productive value. This then brings us to the fact that social media are, of course, 
linked closely with commercial and corporate interests. Significantly, social media 
are often not sites of direct profit making — these are not products that are di- 
rectly ‘sold’ to consumers. Instead, as Richard Sennett (2012, p. 144) observes, 
the ‘economic undertow’ of many social media applications “is less transparent”. 
The main commercial profit to be made from social media lies not in the direct 
selling of services or advertising potential but in the commercial exploitation of 
users’ sociality — what Minna Ruckenstein terms the capitalist commodification 
of user-generated content, where social media allow for the exploitation of the 
unpaid labour of individual social media users — “the intertwining of economic 
profit-making with individual creativity” (Ruckenstein 2011, 
p. 1060). Indeed, the 
real exchange value of social media use can be seen as lying in the ability of elite 
interests to assume a ‘curatorial role” (Gehl 2012) over individually created data. 
Thus beneath the surface veneer of “immediacy, social connection and instant ac- 
cess to information” lie the less obvious “rationalized storage of vast amounts of 

=== PAGE 134 ===
120 
Distrusting ‘Social’ Technologies in Education 
data” and the obvious “long-term archival potential” for the commercial control 
and exploitation of these data and information (ibid., p. 1229). In whatever form, 
then, the logic of capitalism remains intact. 
Social media can therefore be seen as constructing the user as a form of ‘free 
labour’ that can be readily exploited — encouraging users to participate in unpaid 
work during the course of their use of such tools and applications. Some com- 
mentators have equated this with Dallas Smythe’s (1977) theory of ‘the audience 
commodity’ with regard to the exploitation of viewers of broadcast media. In this 
sense, social media can be said to rely on the active participation of a mass audi- 
ence of users (‘audience work’) to increase the value of its advertising revenues, as 
well as to produce content and sustain services on an unpaid basis. One obvious 
outcome of this work is the commercial exploitation of data relating to individual 
users’ activities, preferences and other personal background information. As Mager 
(2012, p. 772) describes, “Based on users’ search history, locations and search terms, 
search engines develop highly detailed ‘user profiles’ capturing desires and inten- 
tions of individuals and groups of users”. These profiles can then be sold to market- 
ers and advertisers, thereby making money through a ‘service-for-profile’ model 
(Elmer 2004), where the price for individuals being able to access seemingly ‘free’ 
services is the collation and exploitation of personal information. Other forms of 
exploitable labour are the commercial reuse of user-generated content, as can be 
seen in the use of ‘citizen journalism’ by media companies, the formation of ‘brand 
communities’ on social networking sites or the archiving of photographic images 
on applications such as Instagram for later possible commercial gain. As Blank and 
Reisdorf (2012, p. 541) conclude, all of these practices have seen a shift in the locus 
of capital “from mass production to production by the masses”. 
Ill. The Commodification of Behaviour 
Beyond motivations of profit seeking, educationalists need to be aware of the 
less obvious — but not less intrusive 
— commodification of action that many social 
media tools engender. As Arvidsson and Colleoni (2012, p. 135) reason, social 
media are not based around the direct buying and selling of commodities, but 
the value that can be created through the initiation of “webs of affective relations, 
and value realization as linked to a reputation-based financial economy”. These 
economies can take different forms. For instance, Gerlitz and Helmond (2010) 
describe the ‘like economy’ of social media — similar to the ‘link economy’ of web 
pages and search engines, but with value predicted upon the quantification of 
user engagement through the results of various options to ‘like’, ‘retweet’, ‘resend’, 
‘recommend’ or ‘bookmark’. 
The building of social media around these user dis- 
plays of affective reaction therefore “allow[s] for transforming intensive social and 
affective dynamics into comparable metrics and thus add[s] a social and personal 
qualification to the hit economy” (Gerlitz & Helmond 2010, p. 3). Social media 
could therefore be said to constitute a form of what Jenkins (2006) describes as 

=== PAGE 135 ===
Distrusting ‘Social’ Technologies in Education 
121 
an ‘affective economy’, where the main criterion of value is what Negri (1999) 
termed ‘affective self-valorisation’. In other words, these are spaces where indi- 
viduals infuse their communicative and affective interactions with messages about 
their consumption and their selves. 
From a more individually focused perspective, concerns are beginning to be 
raised as to how social media bound individuals’ actions within an ‘attention 
economy’ (cf. Simon 1971), compelling users to concentrate on a commoditized 
promotion of self in pursuit of competitive status-driven and reputation-driven 
advantage. Many social media tools and applications certainly encourage a focus on 
presentation of self, as well as the maintenance of personal status, favour and online 
reputation. These concerns could be seen as shaping user behaviour and action to- 
wards a commodified promotion of self and exchange of personal ‘microdetails’ in 
pursuit of competitive advantage and digital ‘one-upmanship’ over others. As Geert 
Lovink (2011, p. 101) observes, social media therefore serve to “validate and cel- 
ebrate the personal, individual and singular. They mobilise the personal as celebrity, 
championing the individual”. As A. Cox (2008, p. 506) also notes, 
Users’ behaviour combines quite conscious altruistic appearing behaviour 
whose purpose is gaining attention with a cloying language of community 
and positivity. In this way, the users’ consumption of the site leads them to 
commodify their own behaviour, in ways which coincide with commercial 
purposes. Much of this behaviour . 
. 
. seems quite solipsistic. 
It has therefore been argued that the ‘very structure’ of social media applica- 
tions “tends to create normativity” (D. Miller 2011, p. 186) — shaping and control- 
ling users’ actions in ways that are more “subtle, seductive and indirect” than has 
previously been the case with earlier forms of internet applications (Ruckenstein 
2011). For example, social media could be said to engender a particular type 
of ‘sociability’ — a safe, nonthreatening exchange where everyone is obliged to 
‘join’ and ‘participate’ but where actual actions and knowledge are highly con- 
formist and consensual. As such, the ‘like-mindedness’, ‘homogeneity’, ‘cultural 
consensus’ and ‘conformist collectivism’ (Ashton 2011) that can be observed in 
much social media use are best understood as necessary elements of this attention 
economy. As Campanelli (2010, p. 29) observes, “Rather than freely and effec- 
tively expressing their thoughts, many users seem concerned only to conform 
as closely as possible to the ‘aesthetic canons’ that rule specific forums. Thus 
dialogue becomes increasingly ritualized, and composed solely of mantra and 
cliché”. This also leads to a minority of people engaging in contrary, extreme 
asocial behaviours of ‘flaming’ or ‘trolling’ 
— what Coleman (2012) describes as 
“acts of transgression and spectacle”. As Campanelli continues, “The only escape 
from these ritualized, shallow and pointless exchanges, it seems, are personal in- 
sults, vilification and politically incorrect statements” (2010, p. 29). This also explains 
popular forms of shared distractions such as cat pictures, jokes and viral round robins 

=== PAGE 136 ===
122 
Distrusting ‘Social’ Technologies in Education 
that “provide momentary, even fleeting, changes and intensities, interruptions and 
divergences” (Dean 2010, p. 116). 
As such social media may be best understood not 
as a place to get things done, but rather as a place to be seen as getting things done. 
This is not to say that such actions are worthless or without merit. Similar to 
our analysis in the previous chapter, the argument can also be made that these social 
media provide a powerful means of individuals ‘learning to labour’ within the new 
capitalist economy. As Cote and Pybus (2011) argue, users of Facebook, Twitter and 
similar applications learn quickly to develop a ‘networked subjectivity’ required to 
survive and thrive as a productive worker and consumer in the immaterial economy. 
Through social networking sites, for example, users are learning a range of work- 
place skills — “‘skills necessary for professional success” (Gregg 2011, p. 10). These 
include the ability to “integrat[e] oneself into networks” (Boltanski & Chiapello 
1999/2005) and the “codified intimacy” of the “bourgeois business culture” where 
there is a deliberately “blurry line between professional and personal etiquette” 
(Gregg 2011, p. 6). These tools therefore provide a valuable ‘apprenticeship’: 
The new social and communicative practices underlying social networks 
like Facebook are hallmarks of immaterial labour 2.0. In turn, both are 
integral to cognitive capitalism. In short, youth and adults, young and old 
are learning techniques and practice that are necessary for the transforma- 
tion and continued growth of capitalist relations. 
(Cote & Pybus 2011, p. 186) 
However, this is not to suggest that the majority of social media actions and 
activities should be seen as individually empowering and beneficial. Instead it is 
important to understand social media use (and social media users) in terms of 
the power relations that are at play within these online activities. In this sense, 
the majority of social media—based actions should not be seen as potentially 
‘free’ forms of participation. Instead, as Beer (2009) notes, social media—based 
participation embeds users within pre-existing relations of power, rather than lib- 
erating or empowering them. Social media—based actions are structured heavily 
by implicit and explicit hierarchies and rules of engagement, and are replete with 
power plays between users, media providers and commercial interests. In this 
sense, these forms of participation should not be seen as forms of freedom from 
power, but rather as forms of subjugation to power. As Brian Massumi concludes, 
Among the most invidious regimes of power are the ones that impose an 
imperative to participate, particularly if the imperative is to ‘truly’ or ‘au- 
thentically’ express yourself. 
You are constantly interpolated. 
You are under 
orders to be yourself — for the system. You have to reveal yourself for who 
you are. In fact, you become who you are in expressing yourself. You are 
viscerally exposed, like a prodded sea cucumber that spits its guts. 
(cited in Mulder 2007, p. 77) 

=== PAGE 137 ===
Distrusting ‘Social’ Technologies in Education 
123 
Conclusions 
An important point that underpins all of these latter criticisms is that while bounded 
and disempowering modes of action and types of activity are understandable (and 
even obvious) in terms of the everyday context of social media use, they go against 
much of the rhetoric of social media as expressed by educationalists and educators. 
As such, social media can be seen as mitigating many ‘educational’ qualities and 
characteristics, not least supporting individuals in questioning information and 
knowledge, or engaging in sustained criticism, debate and disagreement in a con- 
structive manner. In terms of the use of information, for example, social media are 
more likely to encourage a reproduction of a market-like ‘herd mentality’ — sup- 
porting ‘information cascades’ where users are most likely to “tak[e] information 
shortcuts by assuming that what everyone else is doing must be right” (Dean 2010, 
p. 106). This disjuncture can also be seen in terms of the personal interactions 
and relationships that education and learning require. As Friesen and Lowe (2012, 
p. 191) reason, the commercialized conviviality of ‘liking’, ‘friending’, ‘confirming’ 
and so on are not to be conflated with genuine instances of learning — “Facebook 
is consistently structured to support certain modalities of interaction and attention 
and to exclude others such as traditional educational interaction where teacher- 
student relations could rarely be defined as synonymous with friendship”. 
As such, 
social media are configured (in a technical and social sense) for modes of restricted 
communication and exchange that go against the improved forms of educational 
engagement outlined earlier. Indeed, it could be argued that these technologies 
are serving to prepare learners for life in an individualized, commodified, market- 
driven society. As Nick Couldry (2010, p. 82) concludes, through social media 
“neoliberal logic can now rely on a pedagogic machine installed deep within the 
dynamics of contemporary media culture”. 
Of course, many of these latter points should come as little cause for surprise. 
These characteristics of social media are not unique to social media per se — rather 
they are characteristics of contemporary society at large. As many social theorists 
have noted, this is a time of ‘hyperconsumerism’ which is characterized by self 
interest, ‘weak ties’ and “fleeting forms of association” (Sennett 1998, p. 24). A ten- 
dency to seek the company of those similar to ourselves (what Bauman terms 
‘mixophobia’) is a feature of many contemporary offline communities — from 
fears over stranger-danger to our increasing predication for gated communities. 
The notion of the ‘like’ and ‘attention’ economies reflects the shift of capitalism 
towards what Illouz (2007) terms an ‘emotional culture’ — built around the blur- 
ring of the private and the public sphere. These tropes, it could be argued, consti- 
tute the sociality of our times, whether it is mediated online or offline. Indeed, it 
appears that individuals’ engagements in the ‘community’ activities that take place 
in offline ‘real-world’ contexts are similarly restricted and bounded. For example, 
official statistics continue to show that a minority of the adult population are re- 
sponsible for the majority of community volunteering, engagement in charitable 

=== PAGE 138 ===
124 
Distrusting ‘Social’ Technologies in Education 
activities and donations of charitable gifts (see Staetsky 2009). That social media 
appear to replicate — rather than radically disrupt — these general societal patterns 
is not wholly unexpected. After, why would we expect social media to be able 
to recreate forms of collectivism, communality and a public sphere “that perhaps 
never was” (Papacharissi 2002, p. 23)? 
What is surprising, however, is why so many people should be so convinced 
that social media are capable of leading to radically different social arrangements 
and social relations — especially in educational contexts. In this sense, more atten- 
tion needs to be paid to the wilful misunderstanding on the part of some edu- 
cationalists with regard to the redemptive power of social media. For whatever 
reason, many educational technologists appear unwilling or unable to see the 
recent social turn within digital technology for what it is — that is, an extension 
of capitalist relations and contemporary consumer society. This, then, has fuelled 
a distinct romanticization of social media along misleadingly empowering and 
emancipatory lines. So why then, do we persist with the notion that social media 
are a necessary addition to educational provision? Certainly social media pander 
to the social-constructivist sympathies of many educationalists, appearing to 
operate along many of the principles seen as characterizing ‘good’ learning. 
Clearly, social media also appeal to many of the concerns of critical educators — 
offering a means through which learners can be set free from the structures and 
boundaries of institutional control. 
A further imperative for the increased use of social media in education and 
learning is economic rather than educational, with many of the activities and 
roles that are seen as inherent in social media—based learning — that is, knowledge 
creation, knowledge sharing, creativity, group work, cooperation, problem solving, 
emotional engagement — being precisely the roles and competencies that are seen 
as necessities within the neo-liberal workplace. 
As such social media use can quite 
reasonably be justified as supporting the emerging forms of contemporary ‘fast 
capitalism’ and the required ‘twenty-first-century’ skill sets and competencies. In 
this sense, social media — as with many of the digital technologies discussed over 
the past four chapters — can be said to bring a number of ideological values and 
agendas into contemporary education. With this thought in mind, it is now time 
to bring our attention back to the ‘bigger picture’ of these different technologies 
in education. How should we best make sense of what has been argued against 
these various genres of digital technology? Most importantly, how can we make 
productive use of our growing distrust of contemporary forms of educational 
technology? 

=== PAGE 139 ===
/ 
EDUCATIONAL TECHNOLOGY 
Continuities, Contradictions and Conflicts 
Introduction 
These four different ‘genres’ of technology use provide clear illustrations of the 
ideological nature of educational technology. Virtual, open, games and social 
technologies are all sites for the ‘working out’ of values associated with lib- 
ertarianism, neo-liberalism and the needs of the ‘new’ economy — giving these 
ideologies symbolic form as well as grounding them in new sets of educational 
processes, practices and relationships. These are all educational technologies that 
constitute a powerful cultural support system for wider ideological agendas. From 
this perspective, it makes little sense to pursue specific debates over the ‘rights’ 
or ‘wrongs’ of particular technologies in education (e.g., the value of providing 
‘an iPad for every student’, or the mass provision of higher education through 
‘MOOCs’). These are all proxy battles for much broader struggles over the nature, 
form and function of education in the early twenty-first century. As has been sug- 
gested throughout this book, educational technology continues to be enmeshed 
with long-running conflicts concerning the role of education in contemporary 
society — that is, tensions between market and state; private and public good; and 
the primacy of individual as opposed to collective interests. Of course, the rela- 
tionships between these wider ideological conflicts and educational technology 
are not wholly deterministic. The forms of digital technology just described in 
this book are not straightforward manifestations of wider ideological values and 
agendas. Instead, the ideological nature of these educational technologies needs to 
be understood in less direct and more nuanced ways. 
The ideological nature of these educational technologies is not always easy 
to discern. Of course, the fact that it is difficult to recognise these agendas and 
interests is itself an indication of the ideological nature of educational technology. 

=== PAGE 140 ===
126 
Educational Technology: Continuities, Contradictions and Conflicts 
The general sense of digital technologies being inherently ‘beneficial’ is a domi- 
nant position within the field of education and, it follows, a difficult orthodoxy 
to challenge. There are many influential interest groups seeking to promote and 
protect these assumptions as commonsensical and maintain what Freeden (2003, 
p. 108) terms “the impenetrable and non-transparent shield of self-evidence”. 
That said, the past four chapters have gone some way towards deconstructing 
and looking beyond this fuzziness of definition and multifaceted appeal to vari- 
ous interests and agendas that these digital technologies exhibit. In particular, an 
obvious conclusion that emerges is the close links between these technologies 
and established economic interests. 
All these technologies could be said to orien- 
tate educational provision and practice towards a set of underpinning conditions 
where primacy of individual action and market forces is aligned with a set of 
skills, behaviours and dispositions linked with the demands of the new economy. 
Indeed, in many ways it is difficult to look beyond the influence of the impera- 
tives of contemporary capitalism on these forms of educational technology. In 
particular, the immaterial forms of digital education reviewed over the past four 
chapters all have clear links with the needs of immaterial labour — that is, the need 
for self-directing, self-disciplined and routinized workers who are comfortable 
working with (and within) informatic and algorithmic environments. In this 
sense, digital education could be seen as pre-empting the organization and 
exploitation of future immaterial workforces. 
From this perspective, the ideological function of these contemporary forms 
of educational technology could be seen as nothing new per se. It could be con- 
cluded that besides superficial differences in physical form and appearance, the 
forms of digital technology considered in this book represent simply the lat- 
est means of maintaining the capitalist order. While the specific characteristics 
may have changed, the dominant ‘frame of meaning’ (Collins & Pinch 1982) of 
these forms of education can be seen to continue on from the earlier forms of 
education that they seek to replace — that is, the establishment of educational 
arrangements that primarily benefit elite economic interests at the expense of the 
majority. As such, the allegedly ‘new’ features of contemporary digital education 
could be said to be rooted in the long-established logics of accumulation, not least 
the overwhelming imperative of capital and the maintenance of the rate of profit. 
Yet these enduring continuities should not be allowed to obscure what is ‘new’ 
or ‘different’ about these recent forms of digital education. For instance, while 
old models of power appear to remain intact it would appear that there are also a 
number of new forms of power relation emerging from the increased use of these 
technologies in education — what Matthewman (2011, p. 60) describes as “new 
practices, new observations, new organizations and new knowledge”. Certainly 
these digital technologies appear to support an accelerated dematerialization of 
ideology, marking the intensification but also the further displacement and nor- 
malization of values of individualization, marketization and new capitalism in 
educational contexts. These digital technologies can be understood as acting as 

=== PAGE 141 ===
Educational Technology: Continuities, Contradictions and Conflicts 
127 
fluid spaces where ideologically driven activities and practices can be continu- 
ally ‘tamed’, legitimated and normalised in ways that are unencumbered by the 
material and cultural structures of ‘traditional’ physical educational institutions. 
These digital technologies therefore offer a highly flexible means of embedding 
dominant ideologies as “rationality in everyday social organization and imagina- 
tion” (Couldry 2010, p. 5). 
All these observations suggest that there is much here to be challenged and 
critiqued — not least in terms of further exploring the obvious contradictions and 
‘cracks’ within the apparent hegemony of educational technology. The remainder 
of this chapter therefore attempts to develop an immanent critique that explores 
the differences between what is claimed within prevailing commonsensical ideas 
about educational technology and what has become evident from this book’s 
analysis of the same technologies. In other words, the chapter seeks to contest the 
‘pretention’ of educational technology to “correspond to reality” (Adorno 1981, 
p. 32). Hopefully, this will provide solid grounds for challenging the current forms 
of technology use that are found in contemporary education. 
Unpacking the Core Values of Educational Technology 
First, it is necessary to acknowledge the common values and beliefs that could be 
said to underpin the different forms of educational technology featured in this 
book. Perhaps most prominent have been values relating to the individualization 
of practice and action. All these digital technologies could be said to increase 
the responsibility of the individual in terms of the task of making choices with 
regard to education, as well as dealing with the consequences of choice. All these 
technologies also demand increased levels of self-dependence and entrepreneurial 
thinking on the part of the individual, with educational success dependent primar- 
ily on the individual’s ability to self-direct his or her ongoing engagement with 
learning through various preferred forms of digital technology. In this sense, all of 
the digital technologies considered over the past four chapters reinforce many of 
the individualized behaviours and dispositions that are ‘highly valued commodi- 
ties’ within contemporary forms of capitalism — for example, self-directed ‘entre- 
preneurial’ behaviour, conviviality and communicative skills, openness, curiosity, 
reflexivity and so on (see Boltanski & Chiapello 1999/2005). In addition, these 
technologies act to displace formal educational authorities from being involved 
directly in acts of educational provision and consumption, at best repositioning the 
state as capable only of “steering from a distance” (Allen 2011, p. 378). 
Alongside this individualization of action is an increased informalization of 
education, with digital technology reconfiguring the “extent and strictness of 
the social rituals which bind the behaviour of people” in their dealings with 
education and learning (Misztal 2000, p. 8). In this way, all the forms of digital 
technologies reviewed in this book support forms of learning that could be said 
to be indeterminate, fragmented, uncertain and risky. As was apparent throughout 

=== PAGE 142 ===
128 
Educational Technology: Continuities, Contradictions and Conflicts 
the past four chapters, this informality is usually assumed to work in favour of 
the individual and at the expense of self-interested formal institutions. While this 
might well be the case in some instances, these characteristics of informalization 
and anti-institutionalism also favour a number of needs of the ‘new economy’. 
Thus unwittingly or not, digital education provides a ready means through which 
new economic rationalities are internalized as norms and values by individuals, 
groups and institutions. Indeed, from the 1970s onwards, capitalism has adapted 
through the development of networked forms of (dis)organization, based on em- 
ployees’ enhanced autonomy and initiative as well as the establishment of other 
‘freedoms’. Now in the 2010s, increasing numbers of work practices are based 
explicitly around networked principles that are seemingly informal, open and 
‘crowd-based’. Many of the forms of educational technology reviewed in this 
book therefore clearly support the increased foregrounding of these practices and 
activities within education. 
Another value underpinning the digital technologies reviewed in this book is 
the promotion of free-market values and sensibilities as a preferred mechanism of 
educational organization. On one hand, the past four chapters have documented 
the technology-supported promotion of rational market exchange as a dominant 
framework for organizing and regulating educational interaction and exchange. 
Indeed, many of the forms of digital education reviewed in this book could be 
said to both reflect and reinforce “insurgent market fundamentalism in public 
life” (Means 2011, p. 224). From the ‘bazaar’ ethos of open-source production 
and consumption to the ‘attention economy’ of social media use, many current 
forms of educational technology appear to be imbued with market values of 
competitiveness, unregulated exchange, low barriers to entry and the primacy of 
individual choice. On the other hand, many of these technologies also support 
the overt monetization of education provision within commercial marketplaces. 
As we saw in Chapter 3, the ‘virtualization’ of educational processes facilitates 
their production in forms that are easily replicated and sold for profit. Indeed, one 
should not overlook the role of all these forms of technology in reconfiguring 
education into primarily economic forms, and therefore merging education with 
the circuits of capitalism in a number of subtle ways. This reflects what Freed- 
man (2012, p. 84) describes as “the structural need of capitalism to monetise, and 
incorporate within a system of market exchange, even those practices — like blog- 
ging, commenting, and reviewing — that spring from non-commercial urges”. 
One of the major outcomes of this privileging of market organization 
within digital education is the increased diversion of education into a com- 
modity state — that is, framing educational processes and practices into the ‘mar- 
ket form’ of something that has calculable and quantifiable value, and that is 
therefore exchangeable (Appadurai 2005). It seems clear that one of the conse- 
quences of these digital technologies is the reconfiguration of educational prac- 
tices and relations into forms that can be quantified and exchanged. For example, 
Chapter 3 illustrated how ‘virtual’ technologies permit the intensification of 

=== PAGE 143 ===
Educational Technology: Continuities, Contradictions and Conflicts 
129 
capital accumulation in education by fragmenting various educational services 
and aspects of educational work into commodity-like units and tasks. As Vincent 
Mosco (2004, p. 135) argues, this commodification is greatly facilitated by digital 
“opportunities to measure and monitor, package and repackage”. As we saw in 
Chapters 3, 4 and 6, the virtualization, open exchange and social (co)production 
of education processes ably support all of these processes. 
Similarly, the forms of peer production inherent in many open technologies 
and social media use could be seen as extending what Boltanski and Chiapello 
(1999/2005) term ‘the commodification of the human’ within educational con- 
texts. As with all forms of commodification, these digital processes and practices 
involve framing what were previously social relationships into primarily exchange 
relationships between providers and consumers. Thus, as we saw in Chapter 6’3 
discussion of social media, there is a tendency within many of these digital con- 
texts for individuals to have to ‘sell themselves’ to others through the commodifi- 
cation of their public actions and appearances. Social media use therefore involves 
a pedagogical dimension of immaterial] labour where individual users learn to 
affect “a kind of online personal brand management in a network comprised by 
multiple lines of valorisation” (Cote & Pybus 2011, p. 95). Extending Smythe’s 
(1977) notion of the ‘audience commodity’, it could be argued that virtual, open, 
games and social technologies all act to extend increasing amounts of the 24- 
hour day into ‘work time’ that can be potentially monopolised by educational 
providers. 
This latter point raises the increased valuing of privatization throughout the 
digitalization of education. As all of the past four chapters demonstrate, digital 
education is often associated with the reframing and repositioning of the public 
service of education into the domain of private interests. These privatizations are 
manifest in at least two distinct ways. Firstly, digital technologies are implicated in 
what Richard Hatcher (2000) calls the ‘endogenous privatization’ of education — 
that is, strengthening the notion of internal markets based around increased choice 
and diversity of provision, alongside competitive forms of consumption. In this 
sense, the plurality of educational provision supported by virtual, open, games and 
social technologies contributes to the shifting of educational activities “closer to 
those of the private sector or even move[s] them fully into that sector” (Crouch 
2011, p. 71). On the other hand, all these digital technologies are also implicated 
in what Hatcher terms ‘exogenous privatization’ — that is, enhancing and extend- 
ing the importance of nonstate and private actors as educational providers. In- 
deed, one of the clear outcomes of the digitizations of education described in this 
book is the reconstitution of education into forms that are reducible, quantifiable 
and ultimately contractible to various actors outside of the educational commu- 
nity (Maguire, Perryman, Ball & Braun 2011). It is unsurprising that a number 
of powerful private concerns have featured throughout this book’s discussions — 
from the multibillion-dollar concerns of Pearson and News Corporation to a 
range of more locally focused business interests. Thus regardless of their origins, 

=== PAGE 144 ===
130 
Educational Technology: Continuities, Contradictions and Conflicts 
these educational technologies are clearly linked with the increased “dominance 
of public life by the giant corporation” (Crouch 2011, p. viii). 
As the recent analy- 
sis by Picciano and Spring (2013) demonstrates in great detail, digital technologies 
are now a key vehicle for the profit-driven interests of the ‘educational-industrial 
complex’. 
Unpacking the Correspondences of 
Technology Use in Education 
While it is relatively straightforward to identify and describe the values implicit 
within much digital technology use in education, developing a good understand- 
ing of their implication and importance is more complex. So what does it mean 
that digital technology use in education appears to be shaped in the ways just 
described? Here we need to be careful to avoid reaching oversimplified, crude 
conclusions that merely replicate the ‘booster’ or ‘doomster’ lines described at 
the beginning of the book. Instead, it is important to remain mindful that the 
relationships between educational technology and the reproduction of these ide- 
ologies are clearly complex. As such it makes little sense to settle for overly sim- 
plistic functionalist conclusions that, for example, see all uses of technology in 
education linked inevitably with serving the interests of capital, or leading to 
the entrenchment of neo-liberal values in wider society. There is a great degree 
of diversity within these dominant ideologies, as well as 
a number of compet- 
ing influences, and many different instances of disruption and resistance (Graefe 
2005). Thus, rather than making any sweeping pronouncements, it is prudent at 
this point to highlight a number of distinct and dominant interactions between 
digital education and the general reproduction of capital that are worthy of fur- 
ther consideration. 
I. Digital Technology and the Recontextualization of Education 
A prominent theme emerging from the past four chapters is the role of dig- 
ital technologies in reorienting educational processes and practices away from 
the traditional ‘real-world’ contexts of education such as the classroom, school, 
university and other institutionalized forms of engagement. All the technologies 
reviewed in this book are clearly implicated in reconfigurations of educational 
organization — from the ‘gamification’ of school to the provision of ‘massively 
open online courses’. These are fundamental changes that involve the reframing 
of education around virtual forms and algorithmic structures, often under the 
guise of innovation, experimentation and flexibility. One of the key claims of 
‘relocating’ educational processes and practices into ‘the digital ether’ is that the 
social is somehow neutralized or rendered unimportant through the imagined 
“special effect of technological procedures” (Lovink 2011, p. 6) — what is often 
popularly perceived as a de-contextualization of education. At first glance many 

=== PAGE 145 ===
Educational Technology: Continuities, Contradictions and Conflicts 
131 
of the digital technologies reviewed in the past four chapters do appear to have 
successfully stripped away many aspects of ‘education’ that do not relate directly 
to the enhancement of learning and the support of learners. Indeed, all these 
technologies appear to foreground and prioritize ‘learning’ as the central concern 
of educational endeavours, positioning individual users in the role of ‘participants’ 
and therefore reflecting the recent ‘learnification’ of education — where “every- 
thing there is to say about education” is translated into terms of learning and 
learners (Biesta, cited in J. Knox 2012). 
Of course — as we have seen — this apparent de-contextualization serves to 
mask what is more accurately described as a re-contextualization of education. 
Thus, these apparently decontextualized forms of digital education actually in- 
volve the replacement of one set of structures and boundaries with another. In 
particular, it could be observed that all the forms of digital technology discussed 
in this book reframe educational concerns along less collective lines — weakening 
“the basis for people’s ability to enrol [in education] on collective perspectives, 
and pursue what was recognized as the common good” (Boltanski & Chiapello 
1999/2005, p. 532). Unencumbered by the need to learn with those in one’s 
immediate context or locality, these digital technologies certainly make it easier 
to interact and learn with other people of one’s choosing. Yet, as the example 
of social media illustrates, this often results in the situating of education within 
“communities of like-mindedness” (Bishop 2009), where differences between 
individual and collective interests are narrowed substantially. Certainly, the ‘com- 
munities’ of learners established through these digital technologies differ con- 
siderably in terms of social solidarity, underlying structures of power, political 
implications, and ability to support “the social bases of discursive publics that 
engage people across lines of basic difference in collective identities” (Calhoun 
1998, pp. 374-375). 
I. Digital Technology and.the Framing of 
Education as a Competitive Process 
This shift towards forms of educational engagement that are less collective and 
less obligated corresponds with the tendency of many digital technologies to 
frame learning as a competitive endeavour. Of course, the competitive nature of 
digital education is often well hidden within the outwardly supportive, open and 
communal appearance of many of the digital practices discussed in this book. 
In theory, these are technologies that allow individuals to learn harmoniously 
alongside others, “each involved in personal formative cycles, occupied in unison 
within individual feedback-action loops. They learn to become industrious self- 
improvers, accepting and implementing external goals” (Allen 2011, p. 378). Yet, 
although a sense of achievement at the expense of others may not be immediately 
apparent, “competition is humanized and disguised and therefore intensified by 
this formative technology” (ibid.). 

=== PAGE 146 ===
132 
Educational Technology: Continuities, Contradictions and Conflicts 
Thus while not appearing overtly competitive, much technology-based learn- 
ing could be said to be driven by processes of personal ambition and a belief in 
the individual as agent of his or her own destiny. As has been observed repeatedly 
throughout this book, from an individual’s point of view it may often make little 
sense to act collectively when learning with digital technology. Any group behav- 
iours therefore tend to involve limited forms of collectivism that remain moti- 
vated by personal gain. At best, these actions can be seen as constituting forms of 
cooperation rather than collaboration for genuine communal benefit. As Zymunt 
Bauman (2011, p. 17) describes, 
Left increasingly to their own resources and acumen, individuals are ex- 
pected to devise individual solutions to socially generated problems, and 
to do it individually, using their individual skills and individually possessed 
assets. Such an expectation sets individuals in mutual competition, and ren- 
ders communal solidarity ...to be perceived as by and large irrelevant, if not 
downright counterproductive. 
Many forms of digital education can therefore be said to be built around a de- 
creased obligation to others, an enhanced logic of competition and a diminished 
sense of solidarity and togetherness. As such, when learning through digital technol- 
ogies there is often more incentive for individuals to be primarily self-concerned, 
‘rationally selfish’ and motivated by “the drive to better their own condition” (Hind 
2010, p. 140) rather than being primarily concerned with the condition of others. 
Thus, as Fuller (2011, p. 111) observes, the primary locus of concern “shift[s] from 
matters that affect us collectively to those that affect us differentially”. Under these 
conditions, then, there is arguably little ‘added value’ in pursuing any sustained form 
of genuine solidarity with others who are worse off. At best, “taking public action 
or contributing to a common good becomes an act of personal expression and rec- 
ognition or self-validation” (Bennett & Segerberg 2012, p. 752), rather than a basic 
public duty or civic expectation. 
The framing of digital education as a competitive and essentially self-centred 
endeavour could also be said to heighten the responsibility that is placed on the 
individual for his or her relative ‘success’ or ‘failure’ — “turning the blame away 
from the institutions and onto the inadequacy of the self” (Bauman 2001, p. 5). 
There are a number of reasons that this situation might be seen as education- 
ally disadvantageous. For example, in terms of increasing inequalities, a heighted 
sense of personal risk makes it easier for those who have the resources required 
to take the risk. Moreover, it could be argued that digital technologies make the 
risks and uncertainties of educational engagement a distinctly public matter while 
privatizing any eventual rewards. This is rarely an equitable process — leading less 
‘successful’ individuals towards public forms of self-censure, self-disparagement 
and self-selective disengagement (contributing to the formation of what Bau- 
man terms ‘the scapegoated self’). There is also a sense that these individually 

=== PAGE 147 ===
Educational Technology: Continuities, Contradictions and Conflicts 
133 
accountable digital forms of educational participation become a performative 
process, with being seen to engage successfully with education perhaps more im- 
portant than any longer-term outcomes. Referring back to the arguments made 
in Chapter 6 regarding the attention economy of social media, learners may well 
be compelled into ‘performing’ exaggerated or distorted versions of their self on 
the digital stage (Nygren & Gidlund 2012), even if many individuals may not be 
in full control of the ‘self’ that they are able to present when learning online. 
II, Digital Technology and the Total Pedagogization of Society 
The digital technologies reviewed in this book could also be said to correspond 
with an increased expansion of education into unfamiliar areas of society and 
social life — leading to an ‘always-on’ state of potential educational engagement. 
Indeed, the notion of ubiquity lies at the heart of the ideological promises of digi- 
tal education. 
As was suggested in the opening chapter, one of the core promises 
of digital education has long been ‘anytime, anyplace, any pace’ learning. 
Thus it is 
understandable that the digital technologies reviewed over the past four chapters 
all support the expansion of education and learning into domestic, community 
and work settings. There are clear parallels here with what Basil Bernstein (2001) 
identified as the ‘total pedagogization of society’ — that is, a modern society that 
ensures that pedagogy is integrated into all possible spheres of life. Indeed, the 
technologies reviewed in this book all support an enhanced pedagogization of 
previously nonpedagogized areas of social life. For example, we have seen how 
virtual learning environments support the extension of schoolwork into home 
settings, how mobile games support learning in a variety of physical locations, and 
how the attachment of ‘badges’ turns everyday online activities and practices into 
potential episodes of credentialized learning. In all these cases, digital technologies 
are facilitating educational engagement regardless of place, space or setting. 
While these forms of ‘always-on’ access to education are usually presented as 
extending individual choice, for many people these technologies might simply 
exacerbate forms of individual exploitation. 
The notion of always available educa- 
tional participation echoes the notion of the ‘social factory’ — that is, the expan- 
sion of work beyond the places where the production process traditionally takes 
place (such as the factory or the office) into the places of wider society (such as 
the home and local community). In this sense, one of the requirements of the 
new economy is the breaking down and eroding of previously clear distinctions 
between formal and informal labour, and between production and consump- 
tion (Tronti 2012). This raises the concern of digital technology augmenting the 
exploitation of individuals who feel increasingly compelled to engage with edu- 
cation regardless of appropriateness or potential detriment to other areas of life. 
Through digital technologies this compulsion may take a number of different 
forms. For instance, school students may find the family becoming reframed as 
a site of increased engagement of schoolwork while outside of school — further 

=== PAGE 148 ===
134 
Educational Technology: Continuities, Contradictions and Conflicts 
increasing what Beck-Gernsheim (1998) describes as the ‘pressure’ placed upon 
the contemporary family to educate. Similarly, adults may find digital technolo- 
gies further integrating the social relations of learning and consumption, and re- 
ducing the available time for what Andre Gorz (2001) refers to as ‘time for living’. 
IV. Digital Technology and the Dehumanization of Education 
These latter points lead on to the correspondences between digital technology 
and the altered emotional aspects of learning and educational engagement. In par- 
ticular, the disembodied and dematerialized forms of technology-based education 
described over the past four chapters could all be said to involve the experiencing 
of education on less intimate grounds. Joel Spring (2012), for example, argues 
that the increased use of technology in education encourages the formation of 
a ‘digital mindset’, where most elements of the education system are visualized 
in terms of being composed of data rather than personal relations. In this sense, 
we should not overlook the capacity of these digital technologies to ‘quantify 
and instrumentalize’ educational relations (Gregg 2011). As the examples of the 
virtual learning environment, virtual classroom and MOOC all demonstrate, digi- 
tal technologies can easily be used to frame the relationships between teachers 
and students in terms of finite services or contracts rather than sustained human 
interaction. 
Of course, all the digital forms of education outlined in this book need to be 
contextualized within broader historical shifts from the dominance of direct social 
relationships towards indirect social relationships. As Craig Calhoun (1998) has 
noted, this has been hastened by the increasing societal dominance of large-scale 
markets, impersonal data-driven administrative organizations, transportation and 
communication technologies. As Calhoun (1992, pp. 211-212) implies, all forms 
of digital technology act to remediate and reconstitute the nature and form of 
interpersonal human relations within education — “indirect relationships do not 
eliminate direct ones, but they change both their meaning and their sociological 
significance”. In this sense one of the potential outcomes of the generally dis- 
embodied nature of digital education is that of displacing the substantive social 
relationships and social practices that traditionally have been seen to constitute 
education. A strong argument can therefore be made that in “the absence of a 
binding framework such as the face-to-face”, education is experienced in dimin- 
ished terms of disembodied information transfer rather than “embodied under- 
standing” (Cooper 2002, p. 38). 
Overall, then, all these shifts could be said to contribute to a cumulative ‘emp- 
tying’ of the overall educational experience. For example, it could be argued 
that many of the digital technologies reviewed in this book atomise educational 
processes and practices into series of discrete tasks, thereby “enclosing people in 
an entirely commoditized expression of the work to be done” (Menzies 1998, 
p. 92). From this perspective, the partial, segmented, task-orientated, fragmented 

=== PAGE 149 ===
Educational Technology: Continuities, Contradictions and Conflicts 
135 
and discontinuous nature of digital education could be said to rarely “add up to 
any meaningful totality” (Bauman 2001, p. 93). Digital education can therefore be 
seen as a form of ‘spiritual alienation’ — that is, alienation at the level of meaning, 
where ‘conditions of good work’ become detached from the ‘conditions of good 
character’ (Sennett 2012), 
The Contradictions and Conflicts of Educational Technology 
Regardless of whether one agrees with all of these contentions, the contemporary 
orthodoxy of digital education clearly disguises a number of significant conflicts 
and tensions. Of course, these apparent contradictions should not be assumed auto- 
matically to be cause for concern. There are, after all, many people who will be 
advantaged by more elitist, competitive, omnipresent and de-emotionalized forms 
of educational engagement. The outcomes detailed earlier should not be simply 
opposed without good reason. Similarly, it could be argued that these are all shifts 
and alterations that at least need to be ‘got on with’ or ‘worked around’ rather 
than rejected out of hand. Indeed, it would be wrong to judge any of the cor- 
respondences just outlined as inherently ‘undesirable’ for their own sake, or to 
dismiss any of the actors involved in operationalizing these changes as unknowing 
and unaware. As Jodi Dean (2002, p. 5) reflects, ““People know very well what they 
are doing, but they do it nevertheless” (in contrast to Marx’s original observation 
that “they aren’t aware of it, but they do it’). From this perspective, we need to 
move away from the notion that these correspondences between digital technol- 
ogy and the changing nature of education have occurred as a result of a mass false 
consciousness on the part of the majority of people working within education. 
Instead, as Lefebvre (1981/2007) reasons, 
there is no such thing as false consciousness — everyone has an intellectual- 
ized understanding of what they are doing, but these understandings are 
shaped by the material conditions in which they operate and live. As such we 
can only make judgement over what is good sense and what is bad sense — in 
my case from a socially concerned perspective. Every position has an element 
of good sense, even amongst the dominant and oppressive groups. 
Therefore, the reaction that any reader will have to the reconfigurations and 
rearrangements of digital education just described will clearly depend on his or 
her prevailing circumstances and conditions, as well as — at a more fundamental 
level — his or her moral values. 
As such, any discussion of the arguments just pre- 
sented in this chapter can never be completely disinterested or value-free. It is 
appropriate that the remainder of this book considers the apparent outcomes and 
correspondences of digital education in terms of its own explicit values — that is, 
the critical concerns of social justice, inequality and the collective public good. If 
digital education is problematized in these terms, then there is much in what has 

=== PAGE 150 ===
136 
Educational Technology: Continuities, Contradictions and Conflicts 
just been described to distrust — not least the clear inequalities and power imbal- 
ances inherent in these technologies’ deployment in education, and the wider 
corrosion of meaning that they appear to be associated with. These contradictions 
will now be explored in further detail. 
|, Educational Technology and Issues of Inequality 
One of the issues recurring throughout this book has been the role of digital 
technologies in supporting the reproduction of educational inequalities between 
individuals and social groups, often in subtle ways. This certainly contradicts 
the democratic discourses that have surrounded digital education over the past 
30 years and more. For example, Chapter 3 outlined how the virtual provision 
of education tends to be characterized by asymmetrical access, differential en- 
gagement and differential outcomes between learners. Similarly, the participatory 
promises of the educational use of social media obscure the differential levels of 
‘connection’ within networks of peer production and consumption — not least 
the relatively impoverished and disempowered positions of being outside the core 
producer groups. These inequalities are also evident in the ‘nondecisions’ that 
people make because of educational technology — that is, the actions that some 
people are dissuaded or distracted from doing. As such, we need to consider the 
activities and practices that no longer happen or are less likely to happen as a result 
of technology-based education. 
Some of these inequalities are associated with’the marketization of education 
through digital technology. As was argued earlier, the expansion of educational 
provision in ‘virtual’ form often aligns education with commercial practices 
and market logics of online commerce. For example, individuals are now often 
faced with differentiated forms of digital educational opportunities in terms of 
whether they are able to pay, and then how much they are prepared to pay. This 
model of ‘freemium’ provision masks the difference between basic ‘free’ forms 
of educational engagement and ‘premium’ forms of enhanced engagement that 
must be paid for. One such example of the educational inequalities inherent in 
this model is the limited access to social advantage that can be gained from basic 
forms of online education. It could be argued that most of the advantages to be 
gained from taking a full programme of ‘traditional’ study at an elite university 
such as MIT or Harvard are not accessible through their online counterparts — 
especially as experienced in the ‘free’ forms of the ‘massively open’ edX and 
Coursera digital programmes. Instead, the full ‘value’ of these prestigious institu- 
tions can be gained only through their ‘premium’ physical forms, where one can 
access “face to face connections, personal relationships and physical presence 
[that] can be forms of privilege .. 
. Privilege and propinquity, presence and ac- 
cess go together — the principle of the old-boy network” (Sennett 2012, p. 146). 
Of course, inequality of outcome 
is an underpinning feature of market 
forces -- it is an accepted and expected part of neo-liberal thinking that some 

=== PAGE 151 ===
Educational Technology: Continuities, Contradictions and Conflicts 
137 
people will benefit at the expense of others. It is therefore unsurprising that meri- 
tocratic assumptions of ‘winners’ and ‘losers’ run throughout most forms of digital 
education and thereby become “internalized into the practices of aspiring social 
subjects” (Allen 2011, p. 376). Of course, as with most aspects of ideology, issues 
of difference and inequality are rarely (if ever) acknowledged within discussions 
of education and digital technology. Indeed, issues of inequality, injustice and un- 
fairness are notable silences within the commonsensical orthodoxy of education 
and technology. As was observed at the beginning of this book, digital technology 
tends to be assumed as more neutral, more democratic and simply ‘fairer’ than tra- 
ditional educational arrangements. 
This could be seen as reflecting a wider trend 
within global consumer culture to homogenize within a neutrality-seeking view 
of the world that “everybody is basically the same” (Sennett 2012, p. 8). Yet, rather 
than denying the differences inherent in educational technology use, it surely 
makes more sense to concentrate on identifying and challenging them. The 
inequalities of education and digital technology therefore demand sustained 
attention and action. 
These correspondences between digital technologies and educational inequal- 
ities mark one of the most disingenuous aspects of the popular discourses and 
commonsensical assumptions that surround educational technology. As has been 
noted throughout this book, one of the hegemonic effects of digital technolo- 
gies is that they support a sense of individuals being in control of their actions, 
thereby reinforcing the classical liberal view of sovereign individuals making un- 
constrained, informed choices. Of course, in reality this ability to make uncon- 
strained choices and to be in control of constructing one’s existence is a highly 
privileged position. Beck and Beck-Gernsheim (2002) point to the empowered 
condition of ‘individuation’ which is experienced only by an elite of self-sustained 
and self-propelled individuals, as opposed to a majority of merely ‘individualized’ 
individuals who have little option but to act as if their individuation has been 
attained. Similarly, Bauman differentiates between individuals de facto (i.e., the 
minority condition of people living as individuals by choice) as opposed to the 
majority of individuals de jure (i.e., the majority condition of living as an indi- 
vidual by decree). Put simply, then, the conditions under which people become 
individualized and the subsequent consequences of this individualization can 
be seen to vary considerably according to one’s background and biography. For 
the most part, the rhetoric of a generation of hyperindividualized and hyperem- 
powered digital learners is disingenuous — obscuring the reality that most individ- 
uals are faced with an inability to move freely or to choose and ignore selectively. 
As Bauman (2011, p. 101) continues, 
For most of us, our assumed power to get things done seems suspect — fully, 
or at least in large part, a fiction. Most of us lack the resources needed to raise 
ourselves from the status of ‘individuals by decree’ to the rank of ‘individu- 
als de facto’. 
We lack both the needed knowledge and the required potency. 

=== PAGE 152 ===
138 
Educational Technology: Continuities, Contradictions and Conflicts 
The apparent ‘successes’ of individual learners thriving through personalized 
and individualized forms of digital education must therefore be seen as excep- 
tions to the rule, rather than broadly generalizable and replicable trends. While 
some people are clearly able to thrive when set free from the traditional collec- 
tive and communal institutions of education, many other people are not. Despite 
rhetoric to the contrary, the educational opportunities that digital technologies 
offer should not be seen as wholly ‘free’ choices. Digital education does not offer 
a ‘level playing field’ of roughly equal educational opportunities. Instead, as has 
been argued throughout this book, some individuals and groups are clearly able 
to be more proactive, productive and successful when learning with digital tech- 
nologies, while others aré left more vulnerable. Therefore, the outcomes and op- 
portunities offered by digital technologies are as much socially structured as they 
are individually driven. In other words, the likelihood of gaining advantage from 
digital education is clearly related to the resources that social groups command, 
therefore pointing towards the role of digital technology in the perpetuation of 
accumulated advantage and the reproduction of inequalities in education. As Mc- 
Carthy (2011, p. 303) concludes, 
These discourses position the individuals as the locus of success or failure: 
based on their self-discipline, hard-work, ambition, personality and efforts, 
they will either fail or succeed procuring for their well-being. . 
. 
. Missing 
in these discourses is any consideration of the differential and inequitable 
positions of subjects in terms of economic, social and cultural capital, age, 
gender, class, race, ethnicity and sexual orientation. These discourses are 
based in the assumption that all subjects are equally positioned to identify, 
mobilise, and create productive or successful choices. 
I]. Educational Technology and Issues of Power 
These latter points highlight the importance of power in making sense of digital 
technology use. Digital education should therefore be seen as a significant car- 
rier, conveyor and creator of power relations — that is,a key means through which 
power is substantiated (see Foucault 1979). Some of the key contradictions that 
run throughout contemporary forms of digital education include imbalances of 
what people have the capacity to do (and not do) through digital education, 
what is permitted and what is prevented. Digital technologies should therefore be 
understood as an important means through which power is now exacerbated in 
education. Most significantly, we have seen many examples of how these digitally 
mediated power relations are distributed unequally. While popular assumptions 
persist that digital technology can have a ‘centrifugal’ effect on relations of au- 
thority and control within education, much of what we have seen throughout 
this book would suggest that it is mainly ‘centripetal’ — that is, leading to a cen- 
tralization of power rather than a more democratic redistribution of power to 

=== PAGE 153 ===
Educational Technology: Continuities, Contradictions and Conflicts 
139 
those previously less powerful. Indeed, it could be argued that the increased use of 
digital technology in education serves mainly to increase the ability of dominant 
powerful groups to control the actions of others. This control is achieved primar- 
ily by influencing, shaping or even determining the majority’s wants, preferences 
and expectations of what is possible and what is preferable. As Lukes (1974/2005, 
p. 155) describes, 
Power can be deployed to block or impair its subjects’ capacity to reason 
well, not least by instilling and sustaining misleading or illusory ideas of 
what is ‘natural’ and what sort of life their distinctive ‘nature’ dictates, and, in 
general, by stunting or blunting their capacity for rational judgment. Power 
can induce or encourage failures of rationality. 
Seen in these terms, it is clearly misleading to continue to frame digital tech- 
nology as unproblematically increasing the power of all individuals to act along 
broadly equal lines. Instead, as Holloway (2002, p. 28) reminds us, any increase 
in power is embedded in the fragmentation of social relations —“‘our capacity to 
do is always an interlacing of our activity with the previous or present activity 
of others. Our capacity to do is always the result of the doing of others”. As an 
ideological form, digital education is more accurately seen as a site of ongoing 
conflict between people seeking or holding ‘power over’ the actions of those 
whom ‘power is done to’. In this sense, the politics of digital education are, as 
Tim Jordan (1999, p. 211) describes it, “an elaborate dance between individual 
empowerment and elite domination”. Crucially, many of the forms of digital 
technology outlined in this book could be seen as supporting the maintenance of 
existing patterns of domination through the largely nonconflictual manufactur- 
ing of individual “consent to their own subordination” (Delgado 1993, p. 674). 
Indeed, as Lukes (1974/2005) reminds us, the most effective forms of hegemonic 
power are often those that individuals perceive as enabling changes that are in 
their interests. Much of what has been described in the past four chapters points 
to the role of digital education in supporting the exercise of disciplinary power 
by enmeshing individuals into politically compliant and economically productive 
roles which they nevertheless perceive as individually beneficial. Key here, then, is 
the extent to which digital technologies function as a means to restrict the power 
of less dominant social groups — that is, the extent to which digital technologies 
are explicitly disempowering and restrictive for all but an elite minority. 
Indeed, the social groups that appear to benefit most from the use of digital 
technology in education appear to reflect the interests of many of the privileged 
actors outlined in Chapter 2 — that is, the technological elite, the new-economy 
entrepreneurs, the creative capitalist classes and their like. It could be argued that 
digital technologies serve to further distinctly middle-class, consumerist, ‘new 
economic’ norms. It is reasonable to conclude, therefore, that digital education is 
similarly “embedded into the antagonisms of capitalist society ...a class-structured, 

=== PAGE 154 ===
140 
Educational Technology: Continuities, Contradictions and Conflicts 
segmented, stratified social space” (Fuchs 2008, p. 346). As such, discourses of 
providing all individuals with the skills, competences and aptitudes to thrive in 
the new economy are clearly disingenuous. It makes little sense for elite interests 
to support the development of a majority of empowered, innovative, entrepre- 
neurial, self-directed and creatively disruptive individuals. While these qualities 
are certainly required of elite segments of the workforce, the logic of domination 
implies a need for the majority of people remaining digitally docile, subordinate 
and ultimately exploited by dominant interests. As Alex Means (2011, p. 225) 
contends, 
This tension can be explained at least partially by raising the question of 
whether the political elite does in fact desire a highly educated and creative 
workforce at all — preferring instead a small and manageable core of highly 
skilled workers. There is certainly a broad spectrum of evidence regarding 
deepening social stratification and insecurity across educational and em- 
ployment sectors to support this conclusion. 
II], Educational Technology and the Corrosion of Values 
As implied before, some of the key tensions evident within contemporary forms 
of educational technology relate to what is lost and displaced as well as what is 
retained or added. In this sense, a final set of critical issues relates to the subtle 
devaluation of the ‘character’ of education — a less tangible notion than inequality 
or power, but nonetheless important. 
As has beer noted from the beginning of this 
book, a key aspect of ideology is the struggle over meaning that is embedded into 
objects, institutions, practices, social interactions and everyday life. In this sense, 
the digital technologies reviewed over the past four chapters could all be said to 
convey and enforce a limited set of meanings relating to the nature and form of 
educational ‘work’ (be it learning or teaching), and shifting understandings of the 
human relationships that underpin this work. 
This line of critique therefore echoes the criticism that neo-liberal and market- 
led ideologies serve to reduce — if not negate — moral and ethical argument from 
public life. As Sandel (2012) contends, the privileging and promoting of values 
of individualism and marketization have the effect of ‘crowding out’ nonmarket 
and nonindividualistic norms. The promotion of these ideologies through digital 
education could therefore be seen as having a profound influence on “the ways 
in which we think about what we do, and ... our social relations with others” 
(Ball 2012, p. 18). Indeed, throughout the various ‘genres’ of digital education 
examined in this book, little concern is apparent for the values of public good or 
collectivism. Instead, the ‘regimes of value’ (Appadurai 2005) that are most promi- 
nent in many of these instances of digital education centre on issues of status, 
attention, reputation and other forms of individual gain — all enforcing a sense of 
self-preoccupation and indifference to the claims of the community. Conversely, 

=== PAGE 155 ===
Educational Technology: Continuities, Contradictions and Conflicts 
141 
it can be noted that digital education is associated with an increased ‘cheapen- 
ing’ of the institutional provision of education, and a corresponding devaluing of 
people’s judgements about this provision. An awkward yet important question 
that therefore presents itself'is the extent to which digital education is ‘hollowing 
out’ the meaning(s) of education and learning “in any human sense of the word” 
(Cooper 2002, p. 28). 
In addition to these concerns, it could be argued that digital education is 
characterized by a number of subtle changes at the level of social relations. For 
example, personal values of time, duty of care, scholarship or family might be said 
to count for little within models of digital education that are based on speed, rep- 
licability and temporality. This loss of‘coherence’ between educational labour and 
the rest of people’s lives could be seen as part of the wider ‘corrosion of character’ 
that typifies contemporary life. Indeed, Sennett (2012) argues that decreasing the 
significance of institutions like the school within contemporary society runs the 
risk of ‘deskilling’ people in practising and developing the skills of cooperation, 
empathy, consideration and dialogue. It could be argued that the current turn 
towards digital education provision does little to guard against an increased con- 
formity, narcissism and withdrawal from civic participation. Similarly, the current 
digital education landscape could be seen as doing little to challenge wider shifts 
in society towards an unwillingness to cooperate and deal with complexity and 
difference (Sennett 2012). 
This alignment of digital education with wider societal shifts towards the cor- 
rosion of collective concerns within contemporary society raises a number of 
important issues. As we have seen, one of the core contradictions of the individu- 
alized and marketized forms of digital education is their profoundly ‘antisocial’ 
nature — paradoxically “bringing about the ‘disorganization’ of the community 
whose empowerment is being sought” (Holmwood 2011, p. 20). These are forms 
of education that are profoundly socially precarious and unstable. One of the de- 
fining moral and ethical shifts of the digital turn within education could therefore 
be argued to be a declining concern for the common good. As Bauman (2001, 
p. 49) continues, 
Setting people free may make them indifferent.’ The individual is the citi- 
zen’s worst enemy 
.. 
. the individual tends to be lukewarm, sceptical or 
wary of the ‘common good’, of the ‘good society’ or ‘just society’. What is 
the sense of common interests unless they let each individual satisfy his or 
her own? 
At best, then, contemporary forms of educational technology could be seen 
as infusing spaces traditionally intended for the maintenance of public educa- 
tion and the common good with individualized discourses — what Bauman terms 
“the concerns and preoccupations of individuals qua individuals” (ibid.). Tellingly, 
many of the forms of educational technology reviewed over the past four chapters 

=== PAGE 156 ===
142 
Educational Technology: Continuities, Contradictions and Conflicts 
maintain an illusion that learning is taking place on a collective, communal basis 
while at the same time promising highly individualized forms of ‘engagement’, 
‘participation’ and ’empowerment’.As Maraizzi (2011, 
p. 123) observes, one of the 
key paradoxes of these types of neo-liberal ideology is their ability to “make of 
individualism a collective value producing a feeling of supra-personal belonging”. 
Yet if education is viewed in terms of the individual and his or her maximized 
consumption of education, then the argument can be made that educational ac- 
tions are made less meaningful in a moral or ethical sense. In particular, the po- 
tential of education to have any collective, communal meaning is dramatically 
reduced and degraded, as are the socially redistributive qualities of education. 
As Christian Fuchs (2008, p. 149) concludes, notions of digital participation and 
digital cooperation tend to be understood in a very limited sense within ideolo- 
gies of neo-liberalism and new capitalism “because they leave the asymmetrically, 
exclusive, non-participatory, non-cooperative distribution of economic property 
untouched”. 
Conclusions 
This chapter’s criticisms of the devaluing and diminishing of education through 
technological means are clearly contentious. 
As such, it is likely that some readers 
will find themselves in strong disagreement with many of the arguments that have 
developed over the course of this chapter, let alone over the course of this book. 
Yet even a reaction of intense disagreement is more welcome than indifference 
or uninterest. One of the key aims of this book has been to make education and 
digital technology a site of informed controversy rather than uninformed consen- 
sus. Whatever one’s reactions to the points raised in this chapter, it should be clear 
that there is much to argue about here. Some of the critiques developed so far in 
this book may be contestable, yet all point to the need for extended debate over 
the less obvious consequences of the digital turn within education. A number of 
important questions therefore remain with regard to what is being lost, as well as 
what is being gained through the increased centring of education around digital 
technologies. 
Above all, it is important to remain mindful that these are complex 
issues — the controversies of educational technology are certainly not simple tech- 
nical questions with simple technical answers. 
This then brings us to the ‘business end’ of these arguments and contentions. In 
blunt terms we now need to face the questions of ‘so what?’: What does it really 
mean to be living with and working around these digital forms of educational 
engagement? What can really be done to ameliorate some of the most undesir- 
able excesses? In short, are there really any alternatives to the dominant forms 
of educational technology that currently exist? What cracks can be identified in 
the apparent hegemony of education and technology? These questions certainly 
fit with the ‘pessimistic’ approach as laid out at the beginning of this book. Here 
we argued that it is perfectly acceptable — if not downright sensible — to reject 

=== PAGE 157 ===
Educational Technology: Continuities, Contradictions and Conflicts 
143 
the dominant positive assumption in contemporary Western thought that “there 
must be an answer to our fundamental questions, even if we have not found it 
yet, and that this answer will deliver us from suffering” (Dienstag 2006, p. 34). If 
nothing else, this book has been successful in expecting nothing from the current 
arrangements of education and digital technology, and ‘calling attention’ to the 
generally unsatisfactory situation that surrounds contemporary forms of educa- 
tional technology. 
Yet these questions also direct us to now devote time to the second part of 
being purposively pessimistic — that is, as reflected in the notion of being “a pessi- 
mist because of intelligence, but an optimist because of will” (Gramsci 1929/1994, 
p. 299). 
To repeat the argument that was developed in Chapter 1, this should be a 
pessimism that recognises the usefulness of starting from a position that acknowl- 
edges the parameters and boundaries of any technological endeavour, and has re- 
alistic expectations of the political struggles and conflicts that surround any social 
change. 
Yet this realist, informed critical knowledge should then be used to go on 
to inform political action that is more idealistic, progressive and reformist in tone. 
Thus, while pessimistic educational technologists recognise that they may well be 
defeated in their ultimate ambitions, they should be in no way defeatist in their 
actions. In this spirit, therefore, we now need to consider the opportunities that 
might be available to us for change. This provides the focus for the final chapter. 

=== PAGE 158 ===
EDUCATIONAL TECHNOLOGY 
Is There an Alternative? 
Introduction 
Despite its critical demeanour, readers can be forgiven for expecting this book to 
conclude on a reasonably positive note. It is generally not acceptable for authors 
writing on ‘applied’ social science topics to maintain a completely bleak outlook. 
Instead, there is a tacit presumption on the part of readers, publishers and authors 
that the final chapter of even the most scathing critique will rally itself with a con- 
cluding call to arms, ‘manifesto for change’ or 10-point ‘agenda for action’. Larry 
Cuban (2011, p.51) refers to this as the ‘last chapter problem’, where a deliberately 
developed critique then needs abruptly to be “capped with a polished set of policy 
recommendations”. 
Yet, as has been reiterated across the past seven chapters, there 
are rarely any neat solutions to educational problems, and there are certainly very 
few neat solutions that involve the unproblematic use of digital technology as a 
‘technical fix’. This lack of neat solutions is furthered by the nature of ideology 
itself. As Alexander Galloway (2012, p. vii) reminds us, 
Ideology is not something that can be solved like a puzzle or cured like a 
disease .. 
. instead ideology is better understood as a problematic, that is to 
say a conceptual interface in which theoretical problems arise and are gen- 
erated and sustained precisely as problems in themselves. 
This final chapter will not pretend that there are ready answers to the conditions 
described throughout this book. It will recognise, however, that there are perhaps 
some opportunities and spaces where educational technology might be made more 
of an overt struggle than is currently the case. If nothing else, it will recognise the 
need for more carefully considered and clearly articulated debates about education 

=== PAGE 159 ===
Educational Technology: Is There an Alternative? 
145 
and technology. This final chapter is therefore offered in a spirit of acknowledging 
that the hegemony of educational technology might not be wholly changed, but 
that it might well be challenged more effectively. As Paul Virilio contends, there are 
many ways of ‘refusing to collaborate’ with the oppressive modes of technology use 
that pervade contemporary society (cited in Dumoucel 2011). 
Of course, rousing such an oppositional spirit amongst educationalists and 
technologists is no easy task. On one hand, it is understandably difficult to be 
motivated to look beyond the conditions described in this book. After all, what 
has been detailed over the past seven chapters is simply how things in education 
and technology are. This is not to say that there is a mass denial of these issues 
amongst those who are currently most involved in educational technologies. On 
the contrary, many people in education undoubtedly have a nagging sense that 
things are not quite right with education and technology. Yet, as with many things 
in life, it is far easier to simply get on with the day-to-day minutiae of educational 
technology rather than stopping to reflect upon the bigger picture. Indeed, many 
people — if they had time to think about it — would be well able to criticize their 
technology use in education along similar lines to those explored in this book. The 
nature of ideology, however, is that for the most part people do not do this. As Jodi 
Dean (2010, p. 5) observes, “Ideology is what we do, even when we know better”. 
This inertia is not driven by the wholesale internalization of dominant values, yet 
reflects what Fernia (1981, p. 39) describes as ‘“‘an uneasy feeling that the status 
quo, while shamefully iniquitous, is nevertheless the only viable form of society”. 
Any ‘acceptance’ of the current state of educational technology as described in 
this book is therefore best understood as a ‘fragmented’ consciousness — based on 
begrudging resignation rather than outright consent. Thus in exploring alterna- 
tive opportunities we need first to be clear about the latent potential that exists 
within the educational community for such resistance. As Boltanski and Chiapello 
(1999/2005, p. xx) reason, there are good grounds for 
credit[ing] people with genuine critical capacities 
. 
. 
. people are able by 
themselves to measure the discrepancy between discourses and what they 
experience, to the point where capitalism must, in a way, offer — in practice — 
reasons for accepting its discourse. 
Of course, as this quotation implies, the hegemony of educational technology 
is not something that can be wholly rejected, opposed outright or changed. As 
such, perhaps the most straightforward and quickest conclusion to reach is that 
we learn to live with the ideological functions of educational technology — albeit 
in a more aware and knowing manner. This is certainly a tempting conclusion to 
draw. After all, much of what has been described in this book simply reflects a set 
of wider conditions that characterize the general nature of contemporary capital- 
ism. Digital education is by no means the only area of society that is unequal and 
unfair. Indeed, education as a whole has long existed under wider conditions of 

=== PAGE 160 ===
146 
Educational Technology: Is There an Alternative? 
oppression and exploitation, been framed within privileged, middle-class sensi- 
bilities and skills, and located within wider correspondences with the needs of 
the economy, Now, it could be concluded that digital technologies are merely 
one element of the current intensification and acceleration of these conditions. 
As such, the weight of history could well be taken to suggest that there is little of 
substance that can be done to counter the forms of educational technology that 
we currently have before us. 
However, very few people would wish to surrender themselves so readily to 
such a resigned position. It is sensible, therefore, to attempt to look beyond the 
presumption that educational technology is a battle that is already long lost. In- 
deed, it could be reasoned that adopting a stance of weary resignation or uncom- 
fortable compliance would mark the ultimate triumph of educational technology 
as ideology. The ideological shaping of educational technology along individual- 
istic, neo-liberal and new capitalist lines constructs a ‘preferred’ response within 
individuals of being “dutiful, compliant ...and uncritical of the circumstances and 
conditions around [them]” (Smyth 2011, p. 29). Indeed, ideology relies on am- 
bivalence and cynicism in order to function — what Zizek (in Zizek & Daly 2004) 
terms ‘the cynical functioning of ideology’ that encourages a state of indifference 
and inaction despite what people believe to be true. Supporters of the dominance 
of global capital have long relied on the disempowering discourse of “There Is No 
Alternative’, thereby encouraging the perception that there is nothing that can 
be done but adapt to dominant political ideologies. 
Thus it makes little sense to 
completely absent oneself from challenging the conditions laid out in this book. 
Resistance to these conditions may well be possible, although it is unlikely to be 
easy. As Michael Apple (1979, p. 161) concludes, 
Certainly, we must be honest about the ways power, knowledge, and interest 
are interrelated and made manifest, about how hegemony is economically 
and culturally maintained. But we also must remember that the very sense 
of personal and collective futility that may come from such honesty is itself 
an aspect of an effective dominant culture. As an ideological form, it can 
lead us away from concrete action on the conditions which deny us ‘the 
values we most prize’. 
Doing Something about Education and Technology 
Clearly, then, attempts should be made to challenge the current orthodoxy of 
educational technology. Everything that has been discussed in this book suggests 
that there is no sense in waiting for things to eventually ‘come good’ of their ac- 
cord. Instead, by continuing to engage uncritically with digital education in its 
present dominant forms “we build [a] trap that captures us” within the increas- 
ing dominance of these ideologies (Dean 2012, p. 124). The remainder of this 
chapter therefore concerns itself with the task of considering how education and 

=== PAGE 161 ===
Educational Technology: Is There an Alternative? 
147 
technology might be made a site of deliberate conflict and struggle. These sug- 
gestions, it is hoped, might go some way to developing a counterrationality to 
the dominant ideologies of individualism, neo-liberalism and new capitalism. Of 
course the changes that most obviously come to mind are too far-reaching to 
be of any immediate practical use. In theory, of course, much of what this book 
has highlighted would be most efficiently negated by the dismantling of state- 
corporate power, the debunking of market economics and the cessation of the 
‘new spirit of capitalism’. On one hand, then, the obvious logical conclusion that 
this book leads to is the wholesale resistance and unyielding refusal to accept the 
terms of contemporary capitalist society. 
Yet, while many readers may have sympathy with a radical rejection of the new 
capitalist order, there is a need to maintain an appropriately modest and realistic 
tone to our conclusions. As such, this chapter will restrict itself to developing a 
set of pragmatic, achievable and grounded interventions that centre on the ac- 
tions and practices of people working within the area of educational technology. 
Indeed, some critical analyses tend to portray the general population (the ‘multi- 
tude’) either as being passive dopes or active insurgents in the face of hegemony. 
An alternate conclusion to draw, however, involves neither wholly accepting nor 
wholly resisting current conditions. Instead, we should acknowledge the limits of 
our abilities to engineer radical change and look towards likely ways of working 
around and subverting the worst aspects of educational technology as and when 
is possible. As Colin Crouch (2011, p. xi) reasons, “Very few people are ever in a 
position to change to world, and among those few are many who would change 
it for the worse. There is a far, far, bigger audience of people who have to cope as 
best they can with the world they find”. 
However modest these ambitions may be, they need to start from a point 
of consciously beginning to think beyond ideology — developing alternative 
forms of understanding that can then begin to point towards concrete possibili- 
ties for action. In this sense, it is important to encourage the understanding of 
the hegemony of libertarianism, neo-liberalism and new capitalism as ‘bounded 
discourses’ — that is, “terms whose limitations we can think and live beyond” 
(Couldry 2010, p. 6). This involves engaging with the politics of the ideological 
construction of digital education and beginning to think otherwise. As Burnett, 
Senker and Walker (2009, p. 7) reason, “While it is difficult to become disbelieving 
of dominant ideologies, it is not impossible”. This book has already made progress 
along these lines by contrasting the rhetoric and received wisdoms of the domi- 
nant ideologies of digital education against the realities of the social conditions 
that most people actually experience ‘on the ground’. Having recognised these 
contradictions, we should be in a good position to identify the spaces and gaps in 
which alternative conceptions of digital education may develop. 
In particular, one of the key spaces for conflict is redressing the entrenched 
inequalities of education and technology. It has become increasingly evident 
throughout this book that, despite rhetoric to the contrary, digital education 

=== PAGE 162 ===
148 
Educational Technology: Is There an Alternative? 
is a space where power and control are hierarchized and distributed unevenly 
between individuals and dominant interests. Indeed, many forms of educational 
technology would appear to be bound up with political and economic power, 
and the interests of ‘expert’ groups. 
As such, many forms of educational technol- 
ogy would appear to ultimately support the domination of a minority of elite 
interests. One obvious area for change is supporting the wider collective self- 
determination of those groups who are currently less empowered and less engaged 
by the use of digital technologies in education. Thus, rather than continuing to 
delegate power to industry, experts and other vested elite interests, it makes more 
sense to consider ways that less powerful and privileged interests might assume 
more responsibility for the collective self-determination of what digital education 
is, and in whose interests it works. This implies a more democratic approach to the 
governance of digital education and the decision making that surrounds it, as well 
as the development of public lay-expertise and interest in the area. 
Towards a New Set of Values for Education and Technology 
These potential interventions are clearly connected with the wider issue of im- 
buing future forms of educational technology with new values and sensibilities. 
Much of what has been critiqued in this book relates to an obvious ‘crisis of 
values’ that surrounds contemporary forms of educational technology. Having 
spent so much time describing the nature of this crisis, there is a need to set about 
articulating alternative sets of values. As was also the case with Chapter 7, then, it 
makes no sense for this chapter to maintain a false-sense of somehow being ‘value- 
neutral’ in its conclusions. Thus, in line with the concerns of critical theory, we 
should now be in a position to offer perspectives and alternatives for educational 
technology that might serve genuinely progressive social needs. Of course, any 
attempt to think ‘otherwise’ about education and technology along these critical 
lines needs to be realistic and grounded in achievable aspirations. Care therefore 
needs to be taken to offer only what Grace (1994, p. 57) describes as ‘complex 
hope’ — that is, recommendations that “recognize the historical and structural dif- 
ficulties which have to be overcome’’. So what, then, are these ‘complex’ hopes 
and values that might be more desirable and acceptable than those found within 
current constructions of educational technology? Based on our previous discus- 
sions and analyses, we can offer the following suggestions for the revaluing of 
education and technology. 
|. Establishing a Collective Sense of Educational Technology 
Firstly, much of what has been critiqued in this book relates to tensions between 
collective and individual interests. 
The past seven chapters have detailed the limi- 
tations of framing digital technology use in education along individualized lines. 
Of course, this is not a problem that is unique to the educational use of digital 

=== PAGE 163 ===
Educational Technology: Is There an Alternative? 
149 
technology. As Maraizzi (2011, p. 41) observes, digital technologies throughout 
most areas of society tend to “complicate the institutional passage between in- 
dividual and collective interests ... everyone tends to represent him or herself: 
all that is needed to protect one’s own interests is the understanding of the com- 
municative techniques within the working-productive process”. Thus one of the 
primary values that is missing from current configurations of educational technol- 
ogy is a belief that the collective good is as important (if not more important) than 
individual rights. Yet, as has been inferred throughout this book, there is no such 
thing as an ‘individual act’, especially for those who are less able to exercise their 
right to choose. Instead, as John Holloway (2002, p. 26) argues, 
doing is inherently social. What I do is always part of a social flow of doing, 
in which the precondition of my doing is the doing (or having-done) of 
others, in which the doing of others provides the means of my doing. Doing 
in inherently plural, collective, choral, communal. 
This does not mean that 
all doing is (or indeed should be) uidertaken collectively. It means rather it 
is difficult to conceive of a doing that does not have the doing of other as 
a precondition. 
Seen from this perspective, it seems sensible to argue that the products, pro- 
cesses and practices of educational technology are better imbued with a social- 
democratic sensibility that frames digital education in terms of the common 
good, democracy, public life and long-term ‘social connectedness’ in human so- 
ciety (Olssen 2010). These collective values might include issues of commitment, 
loyalty, solidarity, trust, mutual obligation and dignity; a concern with equality 
and redistribution; and overall interest in improving the human condition. Digital 
technology use should also be imbued with what Baier (1986) terms a ‘principle 
of fairness’ according to which individuals are obligated to contribute in relation 
to what they receive. This suggests arrangements of educational technology that 
are communally orientated around shared resources and shared modes of engage- 
ment that are ‘‘consistent with the development of more egalitarian social rela- 
tions” and respectful of difference and diversity (Harvey 2010, p. 126). 
This is not to argue for a complete denial of the presence of the individual 
within educational technology — simply for the curtailing of the worst excesses 
of the self-serving, privatized forms of ‘hyperindividualism’ that are fostered cur- 
rently by digital products, processes and practices. As such, we are not arguing 
completely against the significance of the individual per se, but for a better life for 
all individuals within a collective context. Indeed, it can be argued that genuine 
individual benefit depends upon a sustained sense of collectivism. 
This could sug- 
gest the rearrangement of educational technology along the lines of what Mark 
Olssen (2009) terms ‘thin communitarianism’. 
This organizational form offers a 
working balance between collective politics and individual aspirations and devel- 
opment. In brief, thin communitarianism contends that social, political, economic 

=== PAGE 164 ===
150 
Educational Technology: Is There an Alternative? 
and cultural arrangements need to build around an overt acceptance of the “in- 
terdependence between all things as well as the social and historical character of 
existence” (Olssen 2009, p. 2). Reorganizing educational technology along these 
lines would not demand a uniform consensus and homogeneity of action per se. 
Instead, thin communitarian arrangements would still allow for novelty, individu- 
ality, creativity and variety, while retaining a commitment to the public structur- 
ing of ‘social goods’ such as education. 
How these principles might be enacted in practice will be considered in later 
sections. Yet, for the time being, a strong argument can be made for reconceptual- 
izing our interest in education and technology in ways that can be beneficial to 
individuals and the collective. 
This involves seeking to raise the moral and political 
primacy of the needs of the collective, with the group rather than the individual 
being seen as the leading agent of change. This approach would require a mass 
awareness that no one is alone in their plight (Fuller 2011), and the establishment 
of collective democratic means of deciding policy, the allocation of resources and 
the allocation of work. There would also need to be a pronounced cultural shift 
amongst currently successful individuals to sacrifice some excesses of their privi- 
leged digital existences in the educational sphere,.in order to allow the common 
pursuit of more equitable forms of engagement. In other words, people should 
engage in digital technology with an implicit “willingness to submerge individual 
wants, needs, and desires in the cause of some more general struggle for, say, social 
equality” (Harvey 2005, p. 41). 
Il. Rethinking the Position of Market Values 
Within Educational Technology 
These proposals certainly imply a rethinking of the dominant roles currently 
afforded to market values within digital education. As has already been noted, 
the primacy of markets in shaping the nature and form of digital education can 
be seen as compounding and exacerbating inequalities between individuals and 
social groups, as well as altering the moral character of educational processes and 
practices. Of course, the dominance of market values within educational tech- 
nology provision has resulted undoubtedly in the ‘efficient’ production of many 
forms of educational provision, and advantaged many ‘consumers’ of education. 
Yet market values have also undoubtedly had a distorting influence on the un- 
derpinning character of digital education — reducing individual actions towards 
those that are most easily commodified, supporting competitive practices over 
cooperative practices, and self-interest over collective development. While these 
characteristics of uncertainty, risk, good fortune and greed might be appropriate 
for other areas of digital activity, it should be contended that education (as one of 
the most vital elements of influencing individual life-chances) is too important 
an area of society to be left wholly to the distortions of the ‘market’. As implied 
in Olssen’s description of thin communitarianism, digital education should be 

=== PAGE 165 ===
Educational Technology: Is There an Alternative? 
151 
seen as an important social good. In this way, the provision of digital educa- 
tion should still be considered as a civic duty and public responsibility first and 
foremost, rather than an instrument of profit maximization. Otherwise, as Rose 
(2005, p. 481) warns, the continued application of market rhetoric and market- 
like structures to social goods such as education “coarsens our understanding of 
these matters, leading us into mistakes, loosening our moral grasp, and undermin- 
ing our ties to others”’. 
A key question that arises from these contentions is whether technology-based 
markets are the best mechanisms for organizing the production and distribution 
of education. Of course, there are many variations of ‘the market’. Persuasive 
arguments can be made that the theoretical notion of the ‘pure’ market mechanism 
has been an acceptable and deep-rooted feature of social life throughout human 
history. As Amartya Sen (1999, p. 6) reasons, “To be generically against markets 
would be almost as odd as being generically against conversations between people 
(even though some conversations are clearly foul and cause problems for others — 
or even for the conversationalists themselves)”. Approached in these terms, the 
unfairness and corrosiveness of many of the markets that can be currently found 
in existence within digital education stem from their practical enactment along 
‘impure’ lines. 
As Sen (1999, p. 142) continues, 
The market mechanism, which arouses passion in favour as well as against, 
is a basic arrangement through which people can interact with each other 
and undertake mutually advantageous activities. In this light, it is very hard 
indeed to see how any reasonable critic could be against the market mecha- 
nism, as such. The problems that arise spring typically from other sources — 
not from the existence of markets per se and include such concerns as 
inadequate preparedness to make use of market transactions, unconstrained 
concealment of information or unregulated use of activities that allow the 
powerful to capitalise on their asymmetrical advantage. These have to be 
dealt with not by suppressing the markets, but by allowing them to function 
better and with greater fairness, and with adequate supplementation. The 
overall achievements of the market are deeply contingent on political and 
social arrangements. 
In this sense, it is reasonable to seek to problematize the types of unsupervised 
consumer markets that digital technologies appear to readily support and propa- 
gate within education. 
This is not to argue against market forces per se, but against 
the particular type of neo-liberal, commodity-focused markets that increasingly 
typify educational technology use. Thus rather than denying the existence of mar- 
ket values altogether within the exchanges and interactions implicit in any form 
of digital education, it might be more realistic to suggest simply the development 
of more bounded, supervised forms of exchange. As Sen (1999, p. 120) reasons, 
“The role that markets play must depend not only on what they can do, but 

=== PAGE 166 ===
152 
Educational Technology: Is There an Alternative? 
also on what they are allowed to do”. It seems sensible, therefore, to suggest that 
more effort is made to reorganize digital education beyond the contemporary 
consumer market model, and towards ways that better support the generation 
of equality and reduce the need for competitive behaviours between individuals. 
This suggestion is made partly in the belief that most individuals are capable of 
behaving in ways that move “beyond narrowly defined self-interest” (ibid., p. 250). 
Yet self-regulation by itself is unlikely to be enough, and there is a need to explore 
ways of “supplementing the market mechanism by other institutional activities” 
(ibid., p. 128). 
As Olssen (2009, p. 2) puts it, this suggests the establishment of digi- 
tal education as “a public space where market exchanges are controlled within a 
political realm”’. 
Ill. Establishing a Public Sense of Educational Technology 
These latter points relate to a third overarching concern with the public good 
and a revitalized ethos of public education. As the past seven chapters have dem- 
onstrated, contemporary forms of digital education often appear to be positioned 
in overt opposition to public educational institutions. At best, digital education is 
infused with a sense that the ideals of public service can be best achieved through 
the ‘bottom-up’ efforts of individual citizens and local civic groupings. At worse, 
forms of digital education are used to explicitly devalue and undermine institu- 
tionally organized education. In either form, contemporary educational technol- 
ogy has become infused with the sense that individuals are primarily responsible 
for their own determination, and that the commons of society (such as knowl- 
edge, education, culture) are open for exploitation by private interests. 
This book 
has spent much time detailing the inequitable and undesirable outcomes that 
result when these assumptions are put into practice. From this perspective, then, 
it seems sensible to suggest that powerful checks and balances are put into place 
to counter the ideologically driven construction of digital education as a largely 
private matter. Instead, greater concern needs to be shown within the provision of 
digital education towards the establishment and protection of collective freedoms 
and universal rights. As we have seen, these outcomes are as unlikely to arise from 
the ‘organic’ development of informal activist movements as they are to arise 
from the logic of capital. Instead, as Christian Fuchs (2008) reasons, ‘real counter 
power’ can perhaps come only from the revitalization of well-resourced, durable, 
powerful, permanent public institutions. In particular, this suggests a revitalization 
of the power of government intervention for solving social problems. 
As Zygmunt 
Bauman (201 2a, p. 79) concludes, “The inequality of educational opportunities is 
a matter than can be confronted wholesale only by state politics”. 
What is being argued for here, then, is the development of public forms of 
educational technology governance that are achieved by placing control of the 
political, economic and legal institutions of educational technology into the hands 
of a state that is acting on behalf of society. While not a perfect solution, it seems 

=== PAGE 167 ===
Educational Technology: Is There an Alternative? 
153 
sensible to argue that the primacy of political control over the means and dis- 
tribution of digital resources in education should lie neither with individuals 
nor with the market. Instead it seems sensible to argue that educational technol- 
ogy should be a collectively controlled and publicly owned affair. A strong case, 
therefore, can be made for educational technology benefiting from “the strength 
of public institutions and a sense of public interest” (Crouch 2011, p. 69), and 
the encouragement of forms of educational technology that are public, universal, 
compulsory and free. Digital technology should therefore be seen as an opportu- 
nity to continue (rather than abandon) the collective, common public educational 
project. As John Holmwood (2011, p. 11) concludes, “Public [education] matters 
to everyone, we contend, because it is a condition of citizenship and full partici- 
pation in economic, cultural and political life. Whatever diminishes it, diminishes 
our life in common”. 
The privileging of these values therefore suggests using digital technologies 
to support the ideals of public, collective education, rather than propagate the 
market-led ideals of competition and meritocracy. Looking back to the ideals of 
the comprehensive schooling movement in post-war Britain, for example, sug- 
gests using digital technology to promote values of equality of opportunity and 
capacity to participate. It also suggests using digital technology to foster a sense 
of the educational benefits of collective action — that is, that people “however 
diverse, learn best when they learn together, sharing each other’s insight and ex- 
perience, absorbing knowledge and recreating knowledge as they collaborate, in 
the company of their teachers in a common pursuit” (Brighouse 2003, p. 3). These 
principles of collective responsibility and obligation should therefore be priori- 
tized within future forms of digital education, so that education is positioned as 
an area of certainty rather than risk, and an area that is free from the encroach- 
ment of commercial values. In this sense, forms of educational technology can be 
encouraged that offer respite from the inequalities of other contexts — both online 
and offline. It is this book’s contention that, if functioning properly, the state might 
well be the best institution to achieve these aims. 
Towards a New Set of Arrangements for 
Education and Technology 
As has been noted throughout this book, the ultimate aim of any critical analysis 
of ideology is to at least consider the possibilities for change — however remote or 
difficult these might be in practice.As Geert Lovink (2011, p.69) reasons, academic 
critics of digital media “must progress beyond ideologiekritik and discourse analysis. 
The goal of ‘technology’ criticism is to hard-wire self-reflexivity into the feedback 
loop to change the architecture”. 
Yet successfully ‘hardwiring’ the adjustments and 
changes just discussed into contemporary forms of education and the prevailing 
circuits of contemporary capitalism is an undeniably daunting task. There are no 
easy, short-term responses to the issues raised so far in this chapter. Much of what 

=== PAGE 168 ===
154 
Educational Technology: Is There an Alternative? 
has been suggested over the past dozen pages or so relates to the positioning of 
digital education within a set of profound cultural shifts in the nature of early 
twenty-first-century society. For instance, the idea of repositioning digital educa- 
tion as a collective, public good overseen by the state rather than market values is 
an obviously grand ambition in a society where markets, individualism and private 
interests are predominant. Repositioning digital education along more equitable 
lines is also a profoundly difficult task to take on. Yet if we confine ourselves to 
considering the conditions necessary for the very beginnings of initiating such 
changes then the following simple but realistic shifts might be proposed: 
* 
the stimulation of vigorous ongoing public debate about education and 
digital technology — leading to the framing of digital education as a public 
controversy, and allowing digital education to be challenged, contested, prob- 
lematized and de-reified; 
* 
the establishment of modest forms of enhanced state governance and regula- 
tion of educational technology, with the state supporting the identification, 
development and enactment of alternatives to ideologically driven forms of 
digital education; 
* 
more rigorous and far-reaching academic problematizing of digital educa- 
tion, involving the pursuit of academic writing and research that is better 
able to demonstrate the links between the various types of dominance and 
inequality inherent in digital education. 
The nature of these changes can now be considered in further detail. 
I, Repositioning Educational Technology as a 
Site of Public Controversy 
One activity underpinning all of the changes raised in this chapter so far is that of 
dialogue. Indeed, much of what has just been argued for relates to the establish- 
ment of educational technology as what Raymond Williams (1958) termed a ‘full 
democratic process’. In this sense, a crucial first step in reconstituting educational 
technology along collectively fairer and equitable lines is recognising educational 
technology as a contested public space. As Bauman (2001, p. 201) contends, “De- 
mocracy is, indeed, the practice of continuous translation between the public and 
the private; of reforging private problems into public issues and recasting public 
well-being into private projects and tasks”. It therefore seems sensible to suggest 
that many of the inequalities and injustices associated with contemporary forms of 
digital education might be redressed through open discussion, open argument and 
critical scrutiny of the forms of educational technology that we currently have, 
and those that we want. The tactic here, then, is not to ignore the vested interests 
and agendas that dominate the current shaping of educational technology, but to 
contest them through open argument. By publicly exposing the contradictions, 

=== PAGE 169 ===
Educational Technology: Is There an Alternative? 
155 
deficiencies and failed rhetoric of educational technology then the greater chance 
there might be for the interests of the currently ‘underserved’ majority to hold 
sway over the interests of a ‘superserved’ elite. These debates should publicize, 
politicize and problematize the forms of educational technology described in this 
book, in a manner that provokes a mass interest in educational technology as a 
public issue. 
Of course, mass public engagement with any issue cannot be imposed but must 
be encouraged and nurtured through publicity. This itself is not an easy task, es- 
pecially given the long-standing impoverished condition of public discourse and 
debate with regard to digital technology and education. One of the long-standing 
ideological features of educational technology is its framing as a topic which 
people are conditioned to not think deeply about. This occurs either because 
of an assumed lack of access to ‘expert’ knowledge, perceptions of the inevitable 
direction of technological development and ‘progress’, or simply the apparent 
ubiquity of digital technology use throughout everyday life. At best, users are 
flattered into thinking that digital education gives them enhanced agency and 
control to the extent that there is little need to question the wider arrangements 
of digital education beyond one’s immediate direct experience. As such, pub- 
lic awareness of educational technology has long been shaped disproportionately 
by elite interests such as professional technologists, the IT industry and other 
corporate actors. As should by now be clear, this ‘education-industrial complex’ 
has considerable leverage and influence over the ongoing pursuit of educational 
technology, bolstered by a persistent public indifference towards the subject (see 
Picciano & Spring 2013). 
This current ‘crisis of publicity’ (Hind 2010) might be countered by the sus- 
tained inclusion of all interests and stakeholders in the circuits of debate and 
influence that surround educational technology. First and foremost, this would 
involve the more prominent inclusion of ‘ordinary’ but often marginalized users 
and nonusers of digital education — that is, students, parents, employers, teachers 
and other “groups of concerned citizens and the general public which may be 
both excited by and feel powerless in the face of scientific advance” (Matthewman 
2011, p. 120). There is also a need to better mobilize the interests of organiza- 
tions that have acted traditionally as bulwarks against other forms of ideological 
dominance — in particular trade unions, community groups and other areas of 
civil society such as non-governmental organizations, voluntary groups, charities 
and the professions. There is also room here for the more prominent inclusion of 
oppositional groups that make use of digital media, such as ‘indy media’, hacktiv- 
ist and other alternative technology movements. The aim here, then, would be 
to encourage the closer involvement and interaction between mass publics of 
educational technology that have hitherto been too disaggregated and remote to 
establish sustained connections. 
In all these cases, it is important that these publics are involved in a manner 
that moves beyond ‘tokenistic’ processes of being ‘consulted’, ‘informed’ as to 

=== PAGE 170 ===
156 
Educational Technology: Is There an Alternative? 
what is ‘best’ for them or positioned in a reduced role of expressing ‘learner voice’ 
or ‘consumer voice’. Instead, the aim here would be to openly discuss and facili- 
tate the meaningful rearrangement of educational technology. As such, increased 
democratization of debate is a ready means of moving the culture of educational 
technology away from individualistic and towards collective concerns. Key to the 
success of these discussions and debates would be an emphasis on listening as well 
as telling, and an open-ended sense of a “‘power-charged social relation” of con- 
versation rather than the predestined logic of ‘discovering’ some predetermined 
and preferred truth (Haraway 1991, p. 198). The aim of these conversations would 
be to challenge the legitimacy of current dominant understandings, to develop 
long-terms views on how digital technologies should and should not be embed- 
ded in education practices and to collectively consider and promote a ‘good sense’ 
rather than a ‘common sense’ about education and technology. 
One of the first steps to enacting these conversations is debunking the notion 
of technological expertise. As Brian Wynne (1996) reasons, one does not need to 
know how a nuclear power plant operates in order to have an opinion on how 
they should be used in one’s community. From this perspective, a powerful starting 
point for critical public engagement with an issue such as educational technology 
is to consider people who are currently positioned outside of expert debates as 
‘nonexperts’ only in the sense of not having ‘answers’ or ‘solutions’. Alternatively, 
these ‘nonexperts’ should be seen as still having valid views and concerns about 
education and technology. As Smyth (2011, p. 137) argues, “If we think about the 
role of the ‘outsider’ in these terms, then it becomes clear that the function is not 
about being an ‘expert’. Rather, it is more about .. 
. 
* — starting dialogue among people and setting up amenable conditions; 
* 
eliciting, collecting, researching and bringing together views from as many 
diverse viewpoints as possible; 
* — reflecting, refining and making sense of what is being spoken about; 
* 
interrupting, suggesting, confronting and helping people 
to re-frame 
challenges; 
* 
helping to bring into existence local solutions and actions and ensuring that 
successes are recognized and celebrated”. 
Once these conditions can be established, then there are a range of existing 
public and participatory techniques that can be applied to public engagement 
with educational technology. These include citizens’ juries, expert panels, pub- 
lic hearings, consensus conferences and deliberation polling — all of which have 
been used with some success in areas such as environmental and health policy. 
While many of these techniques could be hosted through digital technology, it 
is important to note that the most effective forms of dialogue might well occur 
offline. As Richard Sennett (2012, p. 24) reasons, the “most potent political effect 

=== PAGE 171 ===
Educational Technology: Is There an Alternative? 
157 
occurs when they stimulate and arouse people to act off-line, rather than con- 
taining them to experience on-screen”. An important role remains, therefore, for 
the dominant twentieth-century institutions of information — such as the broad- 
cast media and newspapers — to play a more confident role in leading informed 
and critical public debates about education and technology. All in all, raising the 
public profile of these issues would require a sustained and widespread publicity. 
While perhaps inconsequential in comparison to the commercial actions that un- 
derpin the digital education marketplace, these public activities might well offer a 
realistic means of supporting the emergence of collective forms of counterhege- 
monic resistance and action. As Nick Couldry (2010) reasons, there is little point 
in encouraging the development of citizen ‘voice’ unless it can be considered 
‘effective voice’. Thus these should be seen not simply as mass-awareness raising 
activities but as efforts to position educational technology as a site of controversy, 
indignation and even moral outrage. 
This politicization of educational technology could well lead to the identifica- 
tion of tangible, material forms of resistance, as well as encouraging more subtle 
cultural shifts. In this latter sense, one of the key areas for contestation and chal- 
lenge should be the language of educational technology. As has been illustrated 
throughout this book, language is key to the maintenance of ideology, providing 
both an immediate vocabulary and underlying cognitive frame through which 
elite values and interests are protected (Thrift 1997). As past chapters have il- 
lustrated, much of the current language of educational technology fulfils this 
ideological function to great effect in often subtle and imperceptible ways. There 
is a need to challenge much of the language that currently shapes understandings 
of education and technology. For example, the dominant metaphor of the ‘net- 
work’ when discussing digital technology plays a subtle role in “impoverish[ing] 
our understanding of power” (Prey 2012, p. 253). The binary logic of being ei- 
ther ‘connected’ or ‘disconnected’ “provokes a one-dimensional understanding of 
power, one that fixates on an inclusion/exclusion binary and is largely blind to 
relations of exploitation” (ibid.). Similar gaps and silences are evident in individu- 
alist notions of ‘one-to-one computing’, ‘personalized learning networks’ and so 
on. Attempts therefore need to be made to ‘uncool’ these dominant concepts 
(Lovink 2011), and promote the use of alternate vocabulary that better describes 
the sense of conflict and contestation underlying the use of digital technology 
in education. Even at this subtle level of linguistic adjustment, powerful changes 
in understanding and action can be enabled. As Richard Pring (2010, pp. 86-87) 
concludes, 
How different the provision of education and training might be if we em- 
ployed different metaphors, for the words we use embody the way in which 
we conceive the world, other people, the relationships between them and 
the way in which they should be treated. 

=== PAGE 172 ===
158 
Educational Technology: Is There an Alternative? 
II. Supporting State Governance and Regulation of 
Educational Technology 
While an important area for change, care needs to be taken not to place an un- 
realistic burden on these popular participatory processes. Public engagement and 
the development of counterrationalities are crucial elements of acting against the 
currently dominant forms of educational technology, yet will be fully effective 
only alongside other more substantial changes to the governance and regulation 
of educational technology. In this sense, we should also consider the enhanced role 
of the state in being more directly involved in educational technology. As much of 
this book has discussed, state involvement in educational technology to date has 
tended to be limited. As David Harvey (2005, p. 79) describes, this is a basic con- 
dition of contemporary capitalism, where “the neoliberal state is expected to take 
a back seat and simply set the stage for market functions”. Certainly, states have 
historically been involved in creating ‘good climates’ for the development of tech- 
nology to take place, and acted as cheerleaders for the broad adoption of educational 
technology. Yet generally state actors have played minimal roles in actively shaping 
or directing the values and nature of technology use in education. 
Arguing for increased state involvement in digital technology is certainly not 
a popular recommendation to make from either a liberal or conservative perspec- 
tive. The roles of the state and state institutions are largely discredited in most 
discussions of the digital technology and the digital age. As Tauel Harper (2009, 
p. 125) observes, 
: 
Amongst theories of techno-politics there is some trepidation when it 
comes to reconciling the state and technology. Many of the state’s services 
seem to require an authoritative ‘General’ which carries the legitimacy and 
control necessary for the provision of community services such as educa- 
tion, security and common law over a geographical territory. Technology, 
on the other hand, seems to challenge the sources. 
Yet as we approach the end of this book, the state appears to perhaps be one of 
the only institutions capable of directing, regulating and controlling educational 
technology along moral lines of ensuring socially ‘fairer’ outcomes. There has 
been little evidence to date that the groups that constitute ‘civil society’ are par- 
ticularly capable of repelling or even mounting a visible challenge to the market 
dominance and capitalist shaping of digital technology. While undeniably ‘noisy’, 
the many voluntary civic and social organizations and institutions that promise 
an alternative to the commercialized, corporate forms of digital technology have 
been less successful in practice than they might have hoped. Indeed, it could 
be argued that these groups have failed largely to construct sustained alterna- 
tives to the dominant neo-liberal ideologies of educational technology, ultimately 
doing little more than “reproducing consent to capitalist domination” (Burawoy 

=== PAGE 173 ===
Educational Technology: Is There an Alternative? 
159 
2005, p. 324). A surprisingly strong case can be made, therefore, for increased 
state involvement and engagement with educational technology. Of course, this 
presumes a strong and engaged ideal form of state that is responsive to multiple 
interests and capable of “facilitating, promoting and protecting the conditions of 
participatory democracy” (ibid., pp. 324-325). 
We are not arguing, therefore, for 
a dirigiste arrangement of state-controlled technology. Instead, we are suggesting 
that digital education is subject to a greater amount of what Archon Fung and 
Erik Wright (2003) term ‘empowered participatory governance’ — that is, where 
government and state agencies are charged with being more responsive and more 
responsible to the conditions of digital education. 
In this sense there are a number of areas in which the responsible state might be 
involved more centrally in the governance and regulation of educational technol- 
ogy. For instance, there may well be scope for increased state involvement in the 
commercial production and provision of educational technologies. As has been 
acknowledged throughout this book, digital technology is an area of society that is 
entwined inextricably with commercial and corporate interests. It is not realistic to 
imagine the mass development and production of digital technologies by the state. 
Yet there are a number of possible ways that states might play a more active role in 
determining the forms of digital education that are enacted within their domains. 
For example, it could be that state organizations play a leading role in the ‘transla- 
tion’ work that surrounds the implementation of any technology within a social 
context — ensuring that the socio-technical ‘conversion’ of educational technolo- 
gies is a collective rather than individual concern (see Kullman & Lee 2012). In 
this sense, the notion of the ‘cultural screening’ of information technologies raises 
the interesting suggestion of how states might be able to adapt digital technologies 
to the national and local contexts in which they will be used, and the groups of 
users who might benefit most from this use (see Babe 2012). For example, states 
may want to ‘screen’ out ideological elements of consumer capitalist culture that 
surround emerging technologies but may benefit only privileged groups who have 
the required economic, cultural and social capitals to benefit fully. 
Alternatively, there may also be scope for states to develop publicly directed — 
if not publicly controlled — forms of commercial activity in digital education as 
part of companies’ commitments to ‘corporate social responsibility’. Instead of 
allowing multinational IT corporations to effectively usurp state governance of 
national educational technology provision, states can seek to restrict aid regulate 
the educational activities of these companies — perhaps as recompense for being 
able to operate freely within other areas of society. Similarly, more could be made 
of the state’s position as a major bulk purchaser of educational technology. Thus 
rather than accepting (and attempting to adapt) digital technologies designed for 
the business or home markets, more genuinely ‘educational’ technologies could 
be commissioned by the state that better fit the collective, common, public good. 
This could see the development of alternative architectures and formats of edu- 
cational technology. Geert Lovink (2011), for example, proposes the ‘dangerous 

=== PAGE 174 ===
160 
Educational Technology: Is There an Alternative? 
design’ of new technologies — such as social networks that are engineered to link 
people by difference rather than similarity, or games that actively reward non- 
competitive actions. There is clearly scope for the design and development of 
educational technologies that are intended to introduce an element of positive 
discrimination and redress existing inequalities and imbalances of power. 
Aside from these instances of assuming a more central role in directing tech- 
nological development, state actors might also play a heightened role in terms 
of the regulation of technology use within educational institutions. Partially, this 
would involve increased state commitment to maintaining and improving physi- 
cal ‘bricks and mortar’ institutions of the school, college and university, rather than 
allowing digital technology to be seen as offering a viable alternative. Of course, 
this is not to overromanticize the capabilities of educational institutions that are 
currently hidebound by regimes of testing, monitoring and control. As Sennett 
(2012, p. 29) argues, “Human beings are capable of doing more than schools, 
workplaces, civil organizations and political regimes allow for”. Yet this is not to 
say that the model of mass, compulsory, physical educational institutions cannot 
be reimagined and redesigned by state interests along more collective, publicly 
orientated lines that can perhaps offer a refuge from the worst excesses of contem- 
porary digital culture. An often suggested issue (that continues to be worthy of 
serious consideration) is state-supported use of schools and universities for foster- 
ing what has come to be referred to in the US and UK as ‘critical digital literacy’ 
(akin to the Scandinavian term ‘digital competence’ and the Dutch term ‘media 
wisdom’). This involves setting time aside within official curricula to allow teach- 
ers and students to make digital technology itself problematic, pay much greater 
political attention to the ‘stuff’ of digital culture and, indeed, consider many of the 
issues that have emerged over the course of this book. 
As Kellner and Share (2007, 
p. 4) describe, this form of education therefore seeks to “deepen the potential of 
literacy education to critically analyse relationships between media and audiences, 
information, and power”. 
Ill. Towards a Better Academic Analysis of 
Education and Technology 
Finally, we need to also consider the role of academic researchers and writers 
within this newly controversial and publicly positioned field of educational tech- 
nology. Certainly academic research in this area can be characterized as generally 
well-meaning but largely ineffective in its eventual political influence and out- 
comes. For example, academic researchers and writers have done little to chal- 
lenge the ideological nature of educational technology over the past 30 years. 
Indeed, it could be argued that academic research has played a supporting role 
in sustaining the hegemony of educational technology by failing to embed its 
analyses within a wider recognition of the prevailing structures of domination and 
associated struggles. In this sense, the academic study of educational technology 

=== PAGE 175 ===
Educational Technology: Is There an Alternative? 
161 
could be described as what Henri Lefebvre (1970/2003) calls a ‘blind field’ — that 
is, a site of misunderstanding, misrepresentation and misinterpretation of what are 
profoundly political issues. 
This is not to claim that academics working in the area of educational tech- 
nology are ignorant of the critical issues that pervade their field of study. Many 
academic writers and researchers working in this area are politically astute, liber- 
ally minded liberals who are trying to make the world a better place. Some would 
consider themselves to be radical thinkers and political activists in other areas of 
their lives. Yet most have developed an unconscious but pronounced critical blind 
spot when it comes to education and technology. Perhaps distracted by the allure 
of digital technology and its promises of radical transformation and liberation, most 
academics are happy to overlook the problematic, dysfunctional realities of most 
technology use in education. 
The best that the academic literature on education 
and technology has offered to date is the championing of the “all-too-easy liberal- 
democratic alternative” (Zizek 2008, p. 6) that is offered by the digital forms of ‘soft 
capitalist’ ideals such as participation, self-organization and cooperation. More con- 
cerning still is the continued tendency within the educational technology literature 
to take pleasure in subverting and undermining mass forms of formal education — 
an antischool agenda that can be traced from the writings of Seymour Papert in the 
1980s to more recent celebrations of “connectivism’. Some of the most popular and 
influential academic accounts of education and technology struggle to hide their 
disdain for formal education, and their default assumption that education is best 
organized along informal lines of discovery, play and ‘hard fun’. These may have 
been radically countercultural approaches in the 1960s and 1970s, but now should 
be seen as profoundly in step with contemporary dominant ideologies. 
So how then could academic research into education and technology be 
strengthened and better organized to provide an effective critique of dominant 
forms of digital education? Certainly, there is a need for academics to ask better 
questions of education and technology, to have more nuanced discussions and 
be more confident in acknowledging the uncertainty of the topic. In this latter 
sense, an increased ‘technological modesty’ within academic discussions of educa- 
tion and technology would surely be welcome — that is, “having a sense of the 
whole and not claiming or obtruding more than a particular function warrants” 
(Postman 1992, p. 119). This suggests the need to ‘de-scientise’ educational tech- 
nology research — that is, to encourage the greater acknowledgement that some 
things can only ever be discussed and problematized rather than demonstrated and 
proved. Thus, academics need to be more confident in posing awkward questions, 
and to conduct research that addresses the ‘messy’ realities of educational technol- 
ogy use in situ. These activities differ from current preoccupations with produc- 
ing evaluations of best practice and speculative reports of potential applications 
in an attempt to keep up with the ‘marketing machinery’ of digital technology 
(Lovink 2011). Academics working in the area of education and technology also 
need to be confident of being critical rather than consensual, and prepared to 

=== PAGE 176 ===
162 
Educational Technology: Is There an Alternative? 
disagree openly with one another and draw attention to substandard work and 
argumentation. At present, such self-scrutiny is largely absent from what has be- 
come a cosy, self-congratulatory field of practice — reminiscent of the ‘accomplice 
paranoia’ that characterizes the world of contemporary art. As Campanelli (2010, 
p. 43) describes, 
In other words, this is a scene that constantly eludes the possibility of critical 
judgement, and leaves space only for friendly, necessary, convivial, sharing of 
nothingness. In such a context, open dissent is seen as utterly inappropriate. 
Nothing is allowed to disturb the quiet harmony of a community that in 
fact comes together for comfort rather than to confront. 
Aside from encouraging greater dissent and confrontation, there are a num- 
ber of conceptual ways in which academics working in the area of education 
and technology might better approach the topic. Certainly there is a need for 
academics to be properly political (with a big ‘P’ and a little ‘p’) in their analy- 
ses of education and media. This is not to say that writers and researchers have 
wholly neglected the issue of politics in their previous work, but more emphasis 
clearly needs to be placed on the politics of class and collectivism. 
There is also a 
need for academic discussions of education and technology to frame ‘new’ tech- 
nologies in a historical manner — therefore attempting to make sense of what 
has already happened with technology rather than anticipating what is about to 
happen. Framing the development of education and technology within a histor- 
ical perspective can have many benefits — revealing how preceding technologies 
often have ramifications for later technologies, as well as offering clearer un- 
derstandings of the meanings and significances attached to technologies before 
they become seen as inevitable, invisible and somehow ‘natural?’ Looking back 
over the history of education and technology might also counter the common 
tendency to “over-estimate the short-term impact of new technologies — and to 
under-estimate their long-term implications” (Naughton 2012, p. 9). 
The academic study of educational technology would be also strengthened 
by a broad and rigorous engagement with theory. There are many theoretical 
approaches and traditions that currently are underutilized in the educational tech- 
nology literature, yet might support the building of better questions, highlight 
otherwise neglected issues and act both as a point of reference and a point of 
correction. As well as engaging with unfamiliar theory, there is also a need for 
better use of the theoretical traditions that have hitherto been favoured in aca- 
demic accounts of education and technology. In short, there are a number of ways 
that researchers might improve how they ‘do’ theory with regard to education 
and technology. Following on from these theoretical concerns, there is also a 
clear need for academic researchers to take a broad approach to research meth- 
ods and methodology, while also maintaining an awareness of the quality and 
rigour of their research. Researchers should be making use of the methods of data 

=== PAGE 177 ===
Educational Technology: Is There an Alternative? 
163 
collection and analysis that best fit their research questions of the moment, rather 
than methods that simply reflect personal convenience or habit. 
Finally, in terms of engaging in academic work that seeks to make a practical 
difference to the conditions that it describes, inspiration could be taken from the 
area of critical participatory design — where usually excluded ‘end users’ are in- 
volved in the development and production of technological artefacts and practices 
in ways that better reflect their interests, needs and values (Iversen, Halskov & 
Leong 2012; Eubanks 2011). Following on from our earlier discussions, it is also 
likely that the academic study of education and technology needs to become 
more deliberately public in spirit — that is, engaging in the production of work 
that moves away “from interpretation to engagement, from theory to practice, 
from the academy to its publics” (Burawoy 2005, p. 324). In this spirit, more 
thought can perhaps be given to how writing and research in education and tech- 
nology can span the boundaries between academic work and public engagement, 
and therefore become more publicly facing and ‘deliberative’ in character (see 
Goodson & Schostak 2014). What scope is there for academics working in the 
area of education and technology to engage in critical forms of public scholar- 
ship that provide “a disruptive but necessary voice in democratic debate” (Lauder, 
Brown & Halsey 2009, p. 580)? What role is there for methods of public research 
such as citizen panels, consensus conferences and science shops that seek to put 
academic research out in wider nonacademic communities? How can a critical 
‘public understanding of education and technology’ be stimulated and supported 
through academic writing and research? 
Above all, then, the academic community needs to be willing and able to 
champion all the critical issues raised throughout this book. Up until now the 
advocates for critical digital issues within public discourse have tended to be 
technologists, activists and hackers — not groups traditionally imbued with power 
or influence with the political or economic classes. While academics are hardly 
the most influential of groups within the cultural establishment, their heightened 
critical presence in educational technology debate and discourse should be pur- 
sued to a far greater degree than it is at present — not least in terms of the relative 
freedom granted to academics to think about digital issues in a more creative and 
less constrained manner. 
Conclusions 
These are all complex and contentious issues that clearly require further thought 
beyond the pages of this book. The underlying aim of all the tentative sugges- 
tions outlined in this chapter is to strengthen people’s resistance to the sense of 
inevitability and certainty that often surrounds educational technology. All these 
suggestions are therefore concerned with shifting the prevailing mindset that 
surrounds education and technology, and beginning to address the problems of 
educational technology in a different manner that relates to actual concerns and 

=== PAGE 178 ===
164 
Educational Technology: Is There an Alternative? 
real-life circumstances. Whether any of the suggestions might lead to tangible 
change is uncertain. In many ways this is not the primary purpose of raising these 
particular ideas. Instead, what is most important is that these ideas act as powerful 
starting points for beginning to think otherwise about education and technology. 
If these types of discussions take place more frequently, then plausible alternatives 
will present themselves more frequently. As has already been stressed, these are not 
issues that have any straightforward, immediately identifiable solutions. 
So what has been achieved by distrusting educational technology? This book 
has attempted to open up the ‘black box’ of educational technology. By thinking 
consistently against educational technology, this book has highlighted some of the 
bigger (but less obvious) connotations and implications of the apparently ‘com- 
monsensical’ act of integrating digital technology into education — not least the 
ideologies of neo-liberalism, libertarianism and the ‘new’ economic arrangements 
of contemporary capitalism. Worryingly for those already working in this area, the 
book has shown the efforts of well-meaning and well-intentioned technology- 
using educationalists to be often “dis-articulated from progressive movements 
and re-articulated to the neoliberal and neoconservative agendas” (Apple 2010a, 
p. 196). 
At best, then, current forms of educational technology appear to be doing 
little to challenge or disrupt the prevailing reproduction of social inequalities that 
characterize contemporary education. 
There are, of course, a number of caveats and limitations to this analysis. First 
and foremost, it should be noted that this book has provided a predominantly 
Western analysis, rooted in European, North American and Australian contexts. 
While many of the arguments made in this chapter may well hold true for the 
more routinely digitally mediated societies of Japan and the Southeast Asian 
‘gang of four’ (i.e., Singapore, South Korea, Taiwan and Hong Kong) as well as 
the high-tech urban regions of South America and South Africa, it is important 
to note that this book does not present a totalizing analysis. What differences 
would be seen, for example, if considering educational technology with Chinese 
or Arabic characteristics? How do these concerns translate in the context of more 
authoritarian regimes where state intervention into digital technology is more 
commonly associated with less benign practices such as overt censorship, surveil- 
lance and oppression? The need remains for the arguments raised in this book to 
be carried over into more nuanced and localized analyses. Moreover, it must be 
acknowledged that this book has focused its critical concerns primarily in terms 
of class, and has had relatively little to say on matters of gender, identity, sexual- 
ity, race and ethnicity. These omissions are largely due to the availability of such 
analyses elsewhere, rather than any deliberate oversight or ignorance. 
Yet perhaps one of most important caveats to our analysis is that of longevity. 
An inevitable shadow that blights any claim of techno-social understanding is the 
impending development of new domains of technology in areas that nontechnol- 
ogists find it difficult to respond quickly to. One of the main reasons that the so- 
cial sciences were relatively slow to respond to the ‘digital revolution’ of the 1970s, 

=== PAGE 179 ===
Educational Technology: !s There an Alternative? 
165 
1980s and 1990s was an unwillingness within disciplines such as sociology to give 
up on confronting the major ‘political technologies’ of class struggle that had 
dominated the first half of the twentieth century — that is, what Rainie and Well- 
man (2012) call the ‘big machines’ of the industrial era such as factories, mills and 
military technology. While the social sciences are now beginning to ‘catch up’ with 
digital technologies and the issues associated with them, there is a corresponding 
need to begin to consider what the next wave of technological change might mean 
for education. If we can be sure of one thing, then the education of the twenty- 
first century will not be influenced and shaped solely by digital technologies. 
While the past 30 years have been characterized increasingly by the development 
of digital technology, the next 30 years look set to be characterized increasingly by 
the development of postdigital technologies of many varieties. An upcoming chal- 
lenge for the critical study of education and technology is to make critical sense of 
what is to come. This will undoubtedly include what Steve Fuller (2011) calls the 
‘converging technologies’ of the nano-, info- and cogno-technosciences, as well 
as biomedical and genetic engineering, and the ‘green’ technologies. These post- 
digital technologies are likely to be associated with another ‘long wave’ of capitalist 
development (Harvey 2010), perhaps with altered ideological implications other 
than have been described in this book. There is clearly a need for an ongoing and 
sustained critical analysis of education and all forms of‘new’ technology for a long 
time to come (see, for example, Lee & Motzkau 2014). 
These future challenges notwithstanding, it is hoped that this book has gone 
some way towards redressing the narrow debates and understandings of digi- 
tal technology that characterize the area of educational technology — offering 
a problematic and pessimistic perspective on an area of education that is rarely 
afforded such scrutiny. As an exercise in critique, it is perhaps unsurprising that 
this has resulted in a book without an uplifting ending, or even an especially neat 
set of conclusions. At best, everything that has been written in this book should 
be treated as a question — as Holloway (2002, p. 215) puts it, “an invitation to dis- 
cuss”. Approached along these lines, one of the key threads of discussion running 
throughout the past eight chapters is the need for everyone involved in education 
to develop a heightened sense of realism about what digital technology is, and 
what digital technology is not; about what technology can do in education, and 
what it cannot. These are important contentions and controversies that need to be 
nurtured throughout the next few years as education becomes ever more digitally 
defined and digitally delineated. 

=== PAGE 180 ===
Qe ae 
ots 
aise 
iahiaLdieaaed 
claiencnsteatal 
n 
tee 
petra 
“ 
os 
sl 
(Receives 
bier Amo grety wR 
Aa 
A ae os «lori 
_ 
Abide sith ortemuaas 4am: et dew - 
5 ae 
Aly \naliosge sy 
oti ae 
amigo 
call as s 
IVA 
Wi 
aceate aiw Sr.» aemaa stay clone Sim 
si 
Rea Sait a> tuhtinanes egies ndcanaene 
| 
in shy Wm en 
THA 
GPO pale 
Md em pehcoriaqghemlp 
~~ We Dol Dae 
> ALS 
sev he este aalyg © clas: me coma ety: 
ONS Oped 
s 
nti 
ats Gee 
Py et @heee |> opdine deen tenge@ 
1 PAG 
ond shyunatee 
chil seem OF Ra 
Sta ens ale Tl i ) Gf 
eed {ee ait Hee acapella Gman lh emit, 
Wa Bas ieee ie all geet at ney amary 
1G CPi ae Oris des B PR, SBS IP ta 
a 
Sgiathet 
= 
y= alte 
entcac beal) 
U3 01) Vpateer-a 
i er Pome 
Antu 
dewtaliie 
i 
° 
NE Em 0 ai SiS pied ow mene 
ete alee belles 
a 
; 
= pal Hank Woah 
60) giro Can mart Win Onl i aati : 
ie C9 Pll etetit omemenegininanes 
ee 
wl 
ad 106 ee ht 
Oe ph paee mara ayn Ay 
<7 PLL 
i Vara aay =a a g@ ow ern 
: 
Dees 
wb iknitg Ahead oe oomtyet eapaamlety . 
ha 
Pi 
Ul tw fab leeete += © eyctateatnay Sagi ately: 
| S_eeenmrTiPr tay 
emoftnyih 
ee melee 
ahaa 
sie 
ee 
0 ee LR Marne 
i 
5 
ai 
tae 
Me 
+ 
a 
yer" 
! 

=== PAGE 181 ===
REFERENCES 
Aarseth, E. (2005). Game studies: What is it good for? International Digital Media and Arts 
Association Journal, 2(1), 3-7. 
Adorno, T. (1981). Minima moralia: Reflections from a damaged life. London: Verso. 
Agger, B. (2004). Speeding up capitalism: Cultures, jobs, family, schools, bodies. Boulder, CO: 
Paradigm. 
Allen, 
A. (2011). Michael Young’s the rise of the meritocracy:A philosophical critique. Brit- 
ish Journal of Educational Studies, 59(4), 367-382. 
Amin, A., & Thrift, N. (2005). What’s left? Just the future. Antipode, 3(2), 220-238. 
Anderson, C. (2009). Free: The future of a radical price. New York: Hyperion. 
Andersen, C., & Pold, S. (2011). The scripted spaces of urban ubiquitous computing: The 
experience, poetics, and politics of public scripted space. Fibreculture, 19, 110-124. 
Appadurai, A. (2005). Commodities and the politics of value. In M. Ertman & J. Williams 
(Eds.), Rethinking commodification (pp. 34-45). New York: New York University Press. 
Apperley, T. (2009). Gaming rhythms: Play and counterplay. Amsterdam: Institute of 
Network 
Cultures. 
Apple, M. (1979). Ideology and curriculum. London: Routledge & Kegan Paul. 
Apple, M. (1986). National reports and the construction of inequality. British Journal of 
Sociology of Education, 7(2), 171-190. 
Apple, M. (2007). Markets, standards, God, and inequality. Seminar given at Institute of Educa- 
tion, London, 5 June. 
Apple, M. (2010a). Global crises, social justice, and education. London: Routledge. 
Apple, M. (2010b). 
The measure of success. In T. Monahan & R. Torres (Eds.), Schools under 
surveillance (pp. 175-192). 
New Brunswick, NJ: Rutgers University Press. 
Apple, M., Ball, S., & Gandin, A. (2010). Introduction. In M. Apple, S. Ball, & A. Gandin 
(Eds.), International handbook of the sociology of education (pp. 1-11). London: Routledge. 
Apple, M., & Jungck, S. (1990). You don’t have to be a teacher to teach this unit. American 
Educational Research Journal, 27(2), 227-251. 
Aronowitz, S. (2008). Against schooling: For an education that matters. London: Pluto. 
Arora, P. (2012). Typology of web 2.0 spheres: Understanding the cultural dimensions of 
social media spaces. Current Sociology, 60(5), 599-618. 

=== PAGE 182 ===
168 
References 
Arvidsson, 
A., & Colleoni, E. (2012).Value in informational capitalism and on the internet. 
Information Society, 28(3), 135-150. 
Ashton, D. (2011). Awarding the self in Wikipedia. First Monday, 16(1—3). http://firstmon 
day.org 
Atkins, D., Brown, 
J., & Hammond, 
A. (2007).A review of the open educational resources move- 
ment: Achievements, challenges, and new opportunities. Menlo Park, CA: William and Flora 
Hewlett Foundation. 
Atkinson, P. (2010). Computer. London: Reaktion. 
Augé, M. (1995). Non-places: Introduction to an anthropology of supermodernity. Translated by 
J. Howe. London: Verso. 
Austin, R. (2005). Kwanzaa and the commodification of Black culture. In M. Ertman & 
J. Williams (Eds.), Rethinking commodification (pp. 178-190). New York: New York Uni- 
versity Press. 
Babe, R. (2012). Theodor Adorno and Dallas Smythe: Culture industry/consciousness in- 
dustry and the political economy of media and communication. In D. Berry (ed.), 
Revisiting the Frankfurt School (pp. 91-115) Aldershot: Ashgate. 
Bacon, S., & Dillon, T. (2006). The potential of open source approaches for education. Bristol: 
Futurelab. 
Baier, K. (1986). The moral point of view. Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press. 
Ball, S. (2007). Reading Michael Apple: The sri imagination at work. Theory and 
Research in Education, 5(2), 153-159. 
Ball, S. (2012). Global Education Inc.: New policy networks and neoliberal imaginary. London: 
Routledge. 
Banaji, S. (2011). Disempowering by assumption. In M. Thomas (Ed.), Deconstructing digital 
natives (pp. 49-66). London: Routledge. 
Barab, S., Gresalfi, M., Dodge, 
T., & Ingram-Goble, A. (2010). Narratizing disciplines and 
disciplinizing narratives: Games as 21st century curriculum. International Journal of Gam- 
ing and Computer-Mediated Simulations, 2(1), 17-30. 
Bartle, R. (1997). Hearts, clubs, diamonds, spades: Players who suit MUDs. Journal of Virtual 
Environments, 1(1). www.brandeis.edu/pubs/jove/ 
HT ML/v1/bartle. html 
Bauman, Z. (2001). The individualized society. Cambridge: Polity. 
Bauman, Z. (2010). Forty-four letters from the liquid modern world. Cambridge: Polity. 
Bauman, Z. (2011). Collateral damage. Cambridge: Polity. 
Bauman, Z. (2012a). On education. Cambridge: Polity. 
Bauman, Z. (2012b). This is not a diary. Cambridge: Polity. 
Beck, U., & Beck-Gernsheim, E. (2002). Individualization: Institutionalized individualism and 
its social and political consequences. Thousand Oaks, CA: SAGE. 
Beck-Gernsheim, E. (1998). On the way to a post-familial family: From a community of 
need to elective affinities. Theory Culture and Society, 
15(3—4), 53-70. 
Becker, K. (2011).The magic bullet: A tool for assessing the evaluating learning potential in 
games. International Journal of Game-Based Learning, 1, 19-31. 
Beer, D. (2009). Power through the algorithm? Participatory web cultures and the techno- 
logical unconscious. New Media & Society, 11(6), 985-1002. 
Bell, M., Smith-Robbins, S., & Withnail, G. (2010). This is not a game — Social virtual 
worlds, fun, and learning. In A. Peachey, J. Gillen, D. Livingstone, & S. Smith-R obbins 
(Eds.), Researching learning in virtual worlds (pp. 177-191). London: Springer. 
Beller, J. (2011). Cognitive capitalist pedagogy and its discontents. In M. Peters & E. Bulut 
(Eds.), Cognitive capitalism, education and digital labor (pp. 123-150). Berlin: Peter Lang. 

=== PAGE 183 ===
References 
169 
Benjamin, W. (2007). The storyteller: Reflections on the works of Nikolai Leskov. In 
Illuminations, translated by H. Zohn (pp. 83-1 10). New York: Scholcken (Original work 
published 1936). 
Benkler, Y. (2006). The wealth of networks: How social production transforms markets and freedom. 
New Haven, CT: Yale University Press. 
Bennett, 
W., & Segerberg, 
A. (2012). 
The logic of connective action. Information, Communi- 
cation & Society, 
15(5), 739-768. 
Benson, L., & Harkavy, I. (2002). Saving the soul of the university: 
What is to be done? In 
K. Robins & E Webster (Eds.), The virtual university: Knowledge, markets and management 
(pp. 169-209). Oxford: Oxford University Press. 
Berdou, E. (2008). Managing the bazaar: Commercialization and peripheral participation in ma- 
ture, community-led free/open source software projects (Unpublished doctoral thesis, London 
School of Economics). 
Bergquist, M., & Ljungberg, J. (2001). The power of gifts: Organizing social relationships in 
open source communities. Information Systems Journal, 11, 305-320. 
Bernstein, B. (2001). From pedagogies to knowledges. In A. Morais, I. Neves, B. Davies, & 
H. Daniels (Eds.), Towards a sociology of pedagogy: The contribution of Basil Bernstein to re- 
search (pp. 363-368). New York: Peter Lang. 
Bezroukov, N. (1999). Open source software development as a special type of academic 
research. First Monday, 4(10). http://firstmonday.org/issues/issue4_10/bezroukov/ 
Bigum, C., & Kenway, J. (1998). New information technologies and the ambiguous future 
of schooling: Some possible scenarios. In A. Hargreaves, A. Lieberman, & M. Fullan 
(Eds.), International handbook of educational change (pp. 95-115). Berlin: Springer. 
Biker, 
W. (2010). How is technology made? That is the question! Cambridge Journal of 
Economics, 34, 63-76. 
Bishop, B. (2009). The big sort. New York: Mariner. 
Blank, G., & Reisdorf, B. (2012). The participatory web. Information, Communication & So- 
ciety, 15(4), 537-554. 
Boellstorff, T. (2008). Coming of age in Second Life. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press. 
Bogost, I. (2008). The rhetoric of video games. In K. Salen (Ed.), The ecology of games: Con- 
necting youth, games and learning (pp. 117-140). Cambridge, MA: MIT. 
Bogost, I. (2011). Persuasive games: Exploitationware. Gamasutra, 3 May. www.gamasutra. 
com/view/feature/6366/persuasive_games_exploitationware.php 
Boltanski, L., & Chiapello, E. (2005). The new spirit of capitalism. Translated by G. Elliott. 
London:Verso (Original work published 1999). 
Bolter, 
J., & Grusin, R. (1999). Remediation: Understanding new media. Cambridge, MA: MIT. 
Bonal, X., & Rambla, X. (2003). Captured by the totally pedagogized society: Teachers and 
teaching in the knowledge economny. Globalization, Societies and Education, 1(2), 169-184. 
Brabham, D. (2010). Moving the crowd at Threadless. Information, Communication & Society, 
13(8), 1122-1145. 
Branco, M. (2006). Free software and social and economic development. In M. Castells & 
G. Cardoso (Eds.), The network society: From knowledge to policy (pp. 289-304). Washing- 
ton, DC: Johns Hopkins University, Centre for Transatlantic Relations. 
Braverman, H. (1974). Labour and monopoly capital. 
New York: Monthly Review Press. 
Brehony, K. (2002). Researching the ‘grammar of schooling’: An historical view. European 
Educational Research Journal, 1(1), 178-189. 
Brennan, 
T. (2011). Intellectual labour. In M. Peters & E. Bulut (Eds.), Cognitive capitalism, 
education and digital labor (pp. 1-22). Berlin: Peter Lang. 

=== PAGE 184 ===
170 
References 
Brighouse,T. (2003). Comprehensive schools then, now and in the future: Is it time to draw 
a line in the sand and create a new ideal? FORUM, 45(1), 3-11. 
Bromley, H. (1997).The social chicken and the technological egg: Educational computing 
and the technology/society divide. Educational Theory, 47(1), 51-65. 
Brown, P., Lauder, H., & Ashton, D. (2011). The global auction: 
The broken promises of education, 
jobs and incomes. Oxford: Oxford University Press. 
Bruns, 
A. (2008). Blogs, Wikipedia, Second Life and beyond. New York: Peter Lang. 
Buckingham, D. (2006). Studying computer games. In D, Carr, D. Buckingham, 
A. Burn, & 
G. Schott (Eds.), Computer games: Text, narrative and play (pp. 1-13). Cambridge: Polity. 
Buckingham, D. (2011). Foreword. In M. Thomas (Ed.), Deconstructing digital natives (pp. ix—x1). 
London: Routledge. 
Buckley, C., Pitt, E., Norton, B., & Owens, 
T. (2010). Students’ approaches to study. Active 
Learning in Higher Education, 11(1), 55-65. 
Bugeja, M. (2006). Facing the Facebook. Chronicle of Higher Education, 52(21), 27 January, 
joysCal, 
Bulut, E. (2011). Creative economy: Seeds of social collaboration or capitalist hunt for 
general intellect and imagination? In M. Peters & E. Bulut (Eds.), Cognitive capitalism, 
education and digital labour (pp. 151-168). Berlin: Peter Lang. 
Burawoy, M. (2005).The critical turn to public sociology. Critical Sociology, 31(3), 313-326. 
Burawoy, M. (2011). On uncompromising pessimism: Response to my critics. Global Labour 
Journal, 2(1), 73-77. 
: 
Burnett, 
J., Senker, P.,, & Walker, K. (2009). Introduction. In J. Burnett, P. Senker, & K. Walker 
(Eds.), The myths of technology (pp. 1-22). Berlin: Peter Lang. 
Caillois, R. (2001). Man, play and games. Chicago: University of Illinois Press. 
Calhoun, C. (1998). The infrastructure of modernity: Indirect social relationships, informa- 
tion technology, and social integration. In H. Haferkamp & N. Smelser (Eds.), Social 
change and modernity (pp. 205-236). Berkeley: University of California Press. 
Cammaerts, B. (2008). Critiques on the participatory potentials of web 2.0. Communication, 
Culture & Critique, 1, 358-377. 
Campanelli, V. (2010). Web aesthetics: How digital media affect culture and society. Amsterdam: NAi. 
Cape Town Open Education Declaration. (2007). The Cape Town Open Education Declara- 
tion. www.capetowndeclaration.org 
Carmichael, P.,, & Honour, L. (2002). Open source as appropriate technology for global 
education. International Journal of Educational Development, 22(1), 47-53. 
Carr, D. (2006). Games and narrative. In D. Carr, D. Buckingham, A. Burn, & G. Schott 
(Eds.), Computer games: Text, narrative and play (pp. 30-44). Cambridge: Polity. 
Carr, D., Oliver, M., & Burn, 
A. (2010). Learning, teaching and ambiguity in virtual worlds. 
In A. Peachey, J. Gillen, D. Livingstone, & S. Smith-Robbins (Eds.), Researching learning 
in virtual worlds (pp. 17-30). London: Springer. 
Carr, N. (2010). The web shatters focus, rewires brains. Wired, June. www.wired.com/ 
magazine/2010/05/ff_nicholas_carr/ 
Cassidy, J. (2006). Me media. New Yorker, 15 May. www.newyorker.com/archive/2006/ 
05/15/0605 15fa_fact_cassidy 
Castells, M. (1996). The rise of the network society. Oxford: Blackwell. 
Castells, M. (2001). The internet galaxy: Reflections on the internet, business, and society. Oxford: 
Oxford University Press. 
Castells, M. (2006). The network society: From knowledge to policy. In M. Castells & G. 
Cardoso (Eds.), The network society: From knowledge to policy (pp. 3-22). Washington, DC: 
John Hopkins Centre for Transatlantic Relations. 

=== PAGE 185 ===
References 
171 
Castronova, E. (2006). Synthetic worlds: The business and culture of online games. Chicago: Chi- 
cago University Press. 
Caswell, T., Henson, S., Jensen, M., & Wiley, D. (2008). Open educational resources: En- 
abling universal education. International Review of Research in Open and Distance Learning, 
9(1), 1-11. 
Chandler, D. (1990). The educational ideology of the computer. British Journal of Educational 
Technology, 21(3), 165-174. 
Chatfield, T. (2010). Why computer games can teach youngsters valuable life lessons. Ob- 
server, 10 January, p. 28. 
Chatti, M., Amine, J., & Quix, C. (2010). Connectivism. International Journal of Learning 
Technology, 5(1), 80-99. 
Chokr, N. (2009). Unlearning: Or how not to be governed? Exeter: Imprint Academic. 
Christakis, N., & Fowler, J. (2009). Connected. New York: Little Brown. 
Clarke, S. (2005). The neoliberal theory of society. In A. Saad-Filho & D. Johnston (Eds.), 
Neoliberalism: A critical reader (pp. 50-59). London: Pluto. 
Colas, A. (2005). Neoliberalism, globalization and international relations. In A. Saad-Filho & 
D. Johnston (Eds.), Neoliberalism: A critical reader (pp. 70-79). London: Pluto. 
Coleman, G. (2004). The political agnosticism of free and open source software and the 
inadvertent politics of contrast. Anthropological Quarterly, 77(3), 507-519. 
Coleman, G. (2012). Phreaks, hackers and trolls: The politics of transgression and spectacle. 
In M. Mandiberg (Ed.), The social media reader (pp. 99-119). New York: New York Uni- 
versity Press. 
Collins, 
A., & Halverson, R. (2009). Rethinking education in the age of technology. 
New York: 
Teachers College Press. 
Collins, H., & Pinch,T. (1982). Frames of meaning: 
The social construction of extraordinary science. 
London: Routledge and Kegan Paul. 
Collins, H., & Pinch, T. (2002). The Golem at large: What you should know about technology. 
2nd ed. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. 
Comino, S., & Manenti, FE (2005). Government policies supporting open source software 
for the mass market. Review of Industrial Organization, 26(2), 217-240. 
Conley,V. (2009). Of rhizomes, smooth space, war machines and new media. In M. Poster & 
D. Savat (Eds.), Deleuze and new technology (pp. 32-44). Edinburgh: Edinburgh Univer- 
sity Press. 
Conole, G. (2012a). Designing for learning in an open world. Berlin: Springer. 
Conole, G. (2012b). Fostering social inclusion through open educational resources. Distance 
Education, 33(2), 131-134. 
Conole, G., & Alevizou, P. (2010).A literature review of the use of web 2.0 tools in higher educa- 
tion. New York: Higher Education Academy. 
Considine, M. (2005). Making public policy. Cambridge: Polity. 
Cooper, S. (2002). Technoculture and critical theory: In the service of the machine. London: 
Routledge. 
Cormier, D, (2012). A Deadhead sticker on a Cadillac: The new open learning. Presenta- 
tion to Cali2012 conference, San Diego, June. 
Cote, M., & Pybus, J. (2011). Learning to immaterial labour 2.0. In M. Peters & E. Bulut 
(Eds.), Cognitive capitalism, education and digital labor (pp. 169-194). Berlin: Peter Lang. 
Couldry, N. (2010). Why voice matters: Culture and politics and neoliberalism. London: Routledge. 
Cox, 
A. (2008). Flickr: A case study of web 2.0. Aslib Proceedings, 60(5), 493-516. 
Cox, R. (1981). Social forces, states and world orders: Beyond international relations theory. 
Millennium — Journal of International Studies, 10(2), 126-155. 

=== PAGE 186 ===
172 
References 
Coyne, R. (1999). Techno-romanticism. Cambridge, MA: MIT. 
Crook, C. (2008). Theories of formal and informal learning in the world of web 2.0. In 
S. Livingstone (Ed.), Theorizing the benefits of new technology for youth (pp. 30-37). Oxford: 
University of Oxford. 
Crook, C. (2012). The ‘digital native’ in context: Tensions associated with importing Web 
2.0 practices into the school setting. Oxford Review of Education, 
38(1), 63-80. 
Crouch, C. (2011). The strange non-death of neoliberalism. Cambridge: Polity. 
Cuban, L. (1993). Computer meets classroom: Classroom wins. Teachers College Record, 
95(2), 185-210. 
Cuban, L. (2011). Critique of celebratory accounts of school digital technology. Educational 
Technology, 51(4), 49-51. 
Curran, J. (2012). Rethinking internet history. In J. Curran, N. Fenton, & D. Freedman 
(Eds.), Misunderstanding the internet (pp. 34-65). London: Routledge. 
Curtis, P. (2009). McDonald’ to sponsor Australian maths lessons. Guardian, 20 March, p. 23. 
Daniel, J. (2009). The expansion of higher education in the developing world. In C. Vra- 
sidas, M. Zembylas, & G. Glass (Eds.), ICT for education, development and social justice 
(pp. 53-63). Charlotte, NC: Information Age. 
Daniel, Y. (2008). The textualised student. In M. DeVault (Ed.), People at work (pp. 248-265). 
New York: New York University Press. 
D’Antoni, S. (2006). Building and supporting international communities of interest: Open edu- 
cational resources/open content. Paris: UNESCO International Institute for Educational 
Planning. 
D’Antoni, S. (2008). Open educational resources: The way forward. Paris: UNESCO Interna- 
tional Institute for Educational Planning. 
Dean, J. (2002). Publicity’s secret. Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press. 
Dean, J. (2010). Blog theory: Feedback and capture in the circuits of drive. Cambridge: Polity. 
Dean, J. (2012). The Communist horizon. London:Verso. 
. 
Deem, R. (2004). New managerialism, academic capitalism and entrepreneurialism. In 
M. Tight (Ed.), Higher education reader (pp. 287-302). London: Routledge. 
de Jong, T., & van Joolingen, 
W. (1998). Scientific discovery learning with computer simu- 
lations of conceptual domains. Review of Educational Research, 68(2), 179-201. 
Delgado, R. (1993). Rodrigo’s sixth chronicle: Intersections, essences, and the dilemma of 
social reform. New York University Law Review, 68, 639-674. 
Dibbell, J. (2006). Play money: Or how I quit my day job and made millions trading virtual loot. 
New York: Basic Books. 
DiBona, C., Ockman, S., & Stone, M. (1999). Open sources: Voices from the open source revolu- 
tion. Sebastopol, CA: O’Reilly. 
Dienstag, J. (2006). Pessimism: Philosophy, ethic, spirit. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University 
Press. 
Donnelly, K. (2012). Educating your child .. 
. it’s not rocket science! Ballan: Connor Court. 
Downes, S. (2010). Deinstitutionizing education. Huffington Post, 2 November. www.huff 
ingtonpost.com/stephen-downes/deinstitutionalizing-educ_b_777132.html 
Ducheneaut, N. (2005). Socialization in an open source software community: A socio- 
technical analysis. Computer Supported Cooperative Work, 14(4), 323-368. 
Dumoucel, C. (2011). Interview with Paul Virilio. Vice, 17(9). www.vice.com/read/paul- 
virilio-506-v17n9 
Duncan-Andrade, J. (2009). Note to educators: Hope required when growing roses in 
concrete. Harvard Educational Review, 79(2), 181-194. 

=== PAGE 187 ===
References 
173 
Dyer-Witheford, N., & de Peuter, G. (2009). Games of empire: Global capitalism and video 
games. Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press. 
Egenfeldt-Nielsen, S. (2006). Overview of research on the educational use of video games. 
Digital Kompetanse, 1(3), 184-213. 
Eichstaedt, P. (2011). Consuming the Congo: War and conflict minerals in the world’s deadliest 
place. Chicago: Chicago Review Press. 
Ekman, M. (2012). Understanding accumulation: The relevance of Marx’s theory of primi- 
tive accumulation in media and communication studies. tripleC, 10(2), 156-170. 
Elansky, C., Mislan, C., & Elavsky, S. (2011). When talking less is more:Exploring outcomes 
of Twitter usage in the large-lecture hall. Learning, Media and Technology, 
36(3), 215-233. 
Elden, S. (2004). Introduction. In H. Lefebvre, Rhythmanalysis: Space, time and everyday life 
(pp. vi-xv). London: Continuum (Original work published 1992). 
Ellis, K. (2008). Cyber charter schools: Evolution, issues, and opportunities in funding and 
localized oversight. Educational Horizons, 86(3), 142-152. 
Elmer, G. (2004). Profiling machines. Cambridge, MA: MIT. 
ESA [Entertainment Software Association]. (2012). Essential facts about the computer and video 
games industry. Washington, DC: Entertainment Software Association. www.theesa.com/ 
facts/pdfs/ESA_EF_2012.pdf 
Eubanks,V. (2011). Digital dead end: Fighting for social justice in the information age. Cambridge, 
MA: MIT. 
Feenberg, 
A. (1991). Critical theory of technology. Oxford: Oxford University Press. 
Feenberg, 
A. (1999). Questioning technology. London: Routledge. 
Fenton, N. (2012a). The internet and radical politics. In J. Curran, N. Fenton, & D. Freed- 
man (Eds.), Misunderstanding the internet (pp. 149-176). London: Routledge. 
Fenton, N. (2012b). The internet and social networking. In J. Curran, N. Fenton, & 
D. Freedman (Eds.), Misunderstanding the internet (pp. 123-148). London: Routledge. 
Fernia, J. (1981). Gramsci’s political thought: Hegemony, consciousness, and the revolutionary process. 
London: Clarendon. 
Fischer, H. (2006). Digital shock: Confronting the new reality. Montréal: McGill-Queen’s Uni- 
versity Press. 
Fisher, M., & Baird, D. (2009). Pedagogical mashup: Gen 
Y, social media, and digital learn- 
ing styles. In L. Hin & R. Subramaniam (Eds.), Handbook of research on new media literacy 
at the K-12 level (pp. 48-71). Hershey, PA: IGI Global. 
Flanagan, K. (1976). The sociology of pessimism. Studies: 
An Irish Quarterly Review, 65, 
239-245. 
Flanagan, M., Howe, D., & Nissenbaum, H. (2008). Embodying values in technology. 
In J. van den Hoven & J. Weckert (Eds.), Information technology and moral philosophy 
(pp. 322-353). Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. 
Foucault, M. (1979). Discipline and punish. Harmondsworth: Penguin. 
Fox, N. (2002). Against the machine: The hidden Luddite tradition in literature, art and individual 
lives. Washington, DC: Shearwater. 
Francis, R. (2010). The decentring of the traditional university. London: Routledge. 
Freeden, M. (2003). Ideology. Oxford: Oxford University Press. 
Freedman, D, (2012).Web 2.0 and the death of the blockbuster economny. In J. Curran, N. Fen- 
ton, & D. Freedman (Eds.), Misunderstanding the internet (pp. 69-94). London: Routledge. 
Friedman, T. (1999). 
The semiotics of Sim City. First Monday, 4(4-5). http://firstmonday 
.org/htbin/cgiwrap/bin/ojs/index.php/fm/article/view/660/575 
Friere, P. (1972). Pedagogy of the oppressed. Harmondsworth: Penguin. 

=== PAGE 188 ===
174 
References 
Friesen, N. (2008). Critical theory: Ideology critique and the myths of e-learning. ACM 
Ubiquity, 9(22). http://ubiquity.acm.org/article.cfm?id=1386860 
Friesen, N., & Lowe, S. (2012). The questionable premise of social media for education: 
Connective learning and the commercial imperative. Journal of Computer Assisted Learn- 
ing, 28(2), 183-194. 
Fuchs, C. (2008). Internet and society: Social theory in the information age. London: Routledge. 
Fuchs, C. (2012). With or without Marx? With or without capitalism? tripleC, 10(2), 
633-645. 
Fuery, K. (2008). New media: Culture and image. New York: Palgrave-Macmillan. 
Fuller, S. (2011). Humanity 2.0: What it means to be past, present and future. Basingstoke: Pal- 
grave Macmillan. 
Fung, A., & Olin Wright, E. (2003). Deepening democracy: Institutional innovations in empowered 
participatory governance. London: Verso. 
Galloway, A. (2006). Gaming: Essays on algorithmic culture. Minneapolis: University of Min- 
nesota Press. 
Galloway, A. (2012). The interface effect. Cambridge: Polity. 
Garite, M. (2003). The ideology of interactivity (or video games and Taylorization of lei- 
sure). Paper presented to Digra 2003 ‘Level Up’ Conference, Utrecht, 
November. 
Garnham, N. (2000). Information society as theory or ideology? Information, Communication 
& Society, 3(2), 139-152. 
Gaver, 
W. (2002). Designing for Homo Ludens. I3 Magazine, 12, 2-6. 
Gee, J. (2003). What video games have to teach us about learning and literacy. New York: Palgrave 
Macmillan. 
Gehl, R. (2012). The archive and the processor: 
The internal logic of web 2.0. Media, Cul- 
ture and Society, 13(8), 1228-1244. 
Gerlitz, C., & Helmond,A. (2010). Hit, link and share: Organizing the social and the fabric 
of the web in a like economy. Paper presented at the DMI Mini-Conference, Amster- 
dam, 24—25 January. 
Glyn, 
A. (2007). Capitalism unleashed: Finance, globalization, and welfare. Oxford: Oxford Uni- 
versity Press. 
Goldberg, G. (2011). Rethinking the public/virtual sphere: The problem with participa- 
tion. New Media & Society, 13(5), 739-754. 
Golding, P. (2000). Forthcoming features: Information and communications technologies 
and the sociology of the future. Sociology, 34, 165-184. 
Golumbia, D. (2009). The cultural logic of computation. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University 
Press. 
Goodson, I., & Mangan, J. (1996). Computer literacy as ideology. British Journal of Sociology 
of Education, 17(1), 65-79. 
Goodson, I., & Schostak, J. (2014). Democracy, education and research: The conditions of social 
change. London: Routledge. 
Goodyear, P., & Ellis, R. (2008). University students’ approaches to learning. Distance Educa- 
tion, 29(2), 141-152. 
Gorz, 
A. (2001). Critique of economic reason: Summary for trade unionists and other Left 
activists. In R. Munck & P. 
Waterman (Eds.), Labour worldwide: Alternative union models in 
the new world order (pp. 41-63). Basingstoke: Macmillan. 
Gouseti, A. (2010). Web 2.0 and education: Not just another case of hype, hope and disap- 
pointment? Learning, Media and Technology, 35(3), 351-356. 
Grabinger, S., Dunlap, 
J., & Duffield, J. (1996). Rich environments for active learning. ALT- 
J, 5(2), 5-17. 

=== PAGE 189 ===
References 
175 
Grace, G. (1994). Urban education and the culture of contentment: The politics, culture 
and economics of inner city schooling. In N. Stromquist (Ed.), Education in urban areas 
(pp. 45-59). Westport, CT: Praeger. 
Graefe, P. (2005). The contradictory political economy of minority nationalism. Theory and 
Society, 
34(5—6), 519-549. 
Gramsci, A. (1994). ‘Letters from prison: Volume one,’ edited by E Rosengarten. New York: 
Columbia University Press (Original work published 1929). 
Gray, K., Thompson, C., Sheard, 
J., Clerehan, R., & Hamilton, M. (2010). Students as web 
2.0 authors. Australasian Journal of Educational Technology, 26(1), 105-122. 
Greenfield, S. (2009). Children: Social networking sites: Debate. Lords Hansard, 707(33) (12 
February), columns 1290-1293. www.publications.parliament.uk/pa/ld200809/Idhan- 
srd/index/090212.html 
Gregg, M. (2011). Work’s intimacy. Cambridge: Polity. 
Grieshaber, S. (2010). Beyond a battery hen model? British Journal of Sociology of Education, 
31(4), 431-447. 
Grimes, S., & Feenberg,A. (2012). Rationalizing play: A critical theory of digital gaming. In 
A. Feenberg & N. Friesen (Eds.), (Re)inventing the internet: Critical case studies (pp. 21-42). 
Rotterdam: Sense. 
Grint, K., & Woolgar, S. (1997). The machine at work: Technology, work and organization. Cam- 
bridge: Polity. 
Hall, R., & Hall, M. (2010). Scoping the pedagogic relationship between self-efficacy and 
web 2.0 technologies. Learning, Media and Technology, 35(3), 255-273. 
Hall, S. (2011). The march of the neoliberals. Guardian, 13 September, G2 supplement, 
pp. 10-13. 
Halpin, H., & Tuffield, M. (2010). Social Web XG Wiki. World Wide Web Consortium 
(W3C) www.w3.org/2005/Incubator/socialweb/wiki/FinalR eport 
Hamilton E., & Feenberg, 
A. (2005). The technical codes of online education. E-Learning 
2, 104-121. 
Haraway, D. (1991). Simions, cyborgs and women. New York: Free Association Books. 
Hardt, M., & Negri, 
A. (2004). Multitude. London: Penguin. 
Hargittai, E. (2008). Whose space? Journal of Computer-Mediated Communication, 13(1), 
276-297. 
Hargittai, E., & Hsieh, 
Y. (2010). From dabblers to omnivores. In Z. Papacharissi (Ed.), 
A networked self (pp. 146-168). London: Routledge. 
Harkin, J. (2007). Death in cyburbia. Guardian, 16 April, p. 33. 
Harper, T. (2009). Smash the Strata! A programme for techno-political ®evolution. In 
M. Poster & D. Savat (Eds.), Deleuze and new technology (pp. 125-142). Edinburgh: Ed- 
inburgh University Press. 
Harris, A. (2008). Young women, late modern politics and the participatory possibilities of 
online cultures. Journal of 
Youth Studies, 11(5), 481-495. 
Harvey, D. (2005).A brief history of neoliberalism. Oxford: Oxford University Press. 
Harvey, D. (2010). The enigma of capital and the crises of capitalism. London: Profile. 
Harvey, L. (1990). Critical social research. London: Unwin Hyman. 
Harviainen, J., Lainema, 
T., & Saarinen, E. (2012). Player-reported impediments to game- 
based learning. Paper presented to DiGRA Nordic 2012 Conference, Tampare, June. 
Hatcher, R. (2000). Profit and power: Business and Education Action Zones. Education 
Review, 13(1), 71-77. 
Heeks, R. (2008). ICT4D 2.0:The next phase of applying ICT for international develop- 
ment. Computer, June, 26-33. 

=== PAGE 190 ===
176 
References 
Helsper, E. (2006). Open source software in higher educational institutions in the UK:A report on 
the 2006 survey. Oxford: Oxford University Computing Services OSS Watch. 
Helsper, E., & Eynon, R. (2009). Digital natives: Where is the evidence? British Educational 
Research Journal, 36(3), 503-520. 
Hilgers, M. (2010). The three anthropological approaches to neoliberalism. International 
Social Science Journal, 61, 351-364. 
Himanen, P. (2001). The hacker ethic. 
New York: Random House. 
Hind, D. (2010). The return of the public. London: Verso. 
Hock-koon, 
A. (2012). Affordances of elliptical learning in arcade video games. Paper pre- 
sented to DiGRA Nordic 2012 Conference, Tampare, June. 
Hoffman, M. (2010). Disciplinary power. In D. Taylor (Ed.), Michael Foucault (pp. 27-39). 
Durham: Acumen. 
Holloway, J. (2002). Change the world without taking power. London: Pluto. 
Holmwood, J. (2011). A manifesto for the public university. London: Bloomsbury. 
Holt, J. (1969). How children fail. Harmondsworth: Penguin. 
Hooper, M. (2010). Back to reality: Giving up the internet. Observer, magazine supplement, 
11 April, 46-49, 
Hosein, 
A., Ramanau, R., & Jones, C. (2010). Learning and living technologies. Learning, 
Media and Technology, 35(4), 403-418. 
Hung, H., & Yuen, S. (2010). Educational use of social networking technology in higher 
education. Teaching in Higher Education, 15(6), 703-714. 
Illouz, E. (2007). Cold intimacies: The making of emotional capitalism. Cambridge: Polity. 
Inge, 
W. R. (2003). The church and the age. Whitefish, MO: Kessinger (Original work pub- 
lished 1912). 
Ito, M., Baumer, S., Bittanti, M., Boyd, D., Cody, R., & Herr-Stephenson, B. (2009). Hang- 
ing out, messing around, and geeking out: Kids living and’learning with new media. Cambridge, 
MA: MIT. 
: 
Iversen, O., Halskov, K., & Leong, T. (2012). Values-led participatory design. CoDesign, 
8 (2-3), 87-103. 
Jenkins, H. (2006). Convergence culture. 
New York: New York University Press. 
Jin, S. (2011). Leveraging avatars in 3D virtual environments (Second Life) for interactive 
learning. Interactive Learning Environments, 19(5), 467—486. 
Johnson, 
A. (2007). Presentation to NASUWT conference, Belfast, 11 April. 
Johnson, J. (2002). Open source software: Private provision of a public good. Journal of 
Economics and Management Strategy, 11(4), 637-662. 
Johnson, S. (2001). Emergence: The connected lives of ants, brains, cities and software. Harmond- 
sworth: Penguin. 
Jonassen, D. (1999). Designing constructivist learning environments. In C. Reigeluth (Ed.), 
Instructional design theories and models: A new paradigm of instructional theory (pp. 215-239). 
Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum. 
Jones, C. (2011). Students, the net generation and digital natives. In M. Thomas (Ed.), De- 
constructing digital natives (pp. 30-45). London: Routledge. 
Jones, S. (2006). Against technology: From the Luddites to Neo-Luddism. London: Routledge. 
Jones, S., & Fox, S. (2009). Generations online in 2009. Washington, DC: Pew Internet and 
American Life Project. 
Jones, S., Johnson-Yale, C., Millermaier, S., & Seoane Perez, F (2009). US college students’ 
internet use. Journal of Computer-Mediated Communication, 14, 244-264. 
Jordan, T. (1999). Cyberpower: The culture and politics of cyberspace and the internet. London: 
Routledge. 

=== PAGE 191 ===
References 
177 
Joseph, M. (2005). The multivalent commodity. In M. Ertman & J. Williams (Eds.), Rethink- 
ing commodification (pp. 383-401). New York: New York University Press. 
Junco, R., Heiberger, G., & Loken, E. (2011).The effect of Twitter on college student en- 
gagement and grades. Journal of Computer Assisted Learning, 27(2), 119-132. 
Juul, J. (2003). The game, the player, the world: Looking for a heart of gameness. In 
M. Copier & J. Raessens (Eds.), Proceedings: ‘Level Up’ digital games research conference 
(pp. 30-45). Utrecht: Utrecht University Press. 
Kahane, B. (2009). Old wine in new bottles: How new technology recycles old myths, In 
J. Burnett, P. Senker, & K. Walker (Eds.), The myths of technology (pp. 53-67). Berlin: Peter 
Lang. 
Keen, 
A. (2007). The cult of the amateur. London: Nicholas Brealey. 
Kelemen, M., & Smith, W. (2001). Community and its ‘virtual’ promises: A critique of cy- 
berlibertarian rhetoric. Information, Communication & Society, 4(3), 370-387. 
Kellner, D., & Share, J. (2007). Critical media literacy, democracy and the reconstruction of 
education. In D, Macedo & S. Steinberg (Eds.), Media literacy: A reader (pp. 3-23). New 
York: Peter Lang. 
Kelly, K. (2010). My bright idea: Technology is as great a force as nature. Observer, 24 Oc- 
tober, review section, p. 22. 
Kelty, C. (2008). Tivo bits: The cultural significance of free software. Durham, NC: Duke Uni- 
versity Press. 
Kennedy, G., & Judd,T. (2011). Beyond Google and the ‘satisificing’ searching of digital na- 
tives. In M. Thomas (Ed.), Deconstructing digital natives (pp. 119-130). London: Routledge. 
Kipfer, S., Goonewardena, K., Schmid, C., & Milgrom, R. (2008). On the production of 
Henri Lefebvre. In K. Goonewardena, S. Kipfer, R. Milgrom, & C. Schmid (Eds.), Space, 
difference, everyday life (pp. 1-23). London: Routledge. 
Kirkpatrick, D. (2004). How the open-source world plans to smack down Microsoft, and 
Oracle and ... Fortune, 149(4), 92. 
Kling, R., & Iacono, S. (1988). The mobilization of support for computerization: 
The role 
of computerization movements. Social Problems, 35(3), 226-243. 
Klopfer, E. (2008). Augmented learning. Cambridge, MA: MIT. 
Knox, D. (2010). Spies in the house of learning: A typology of surveillance in online learn- 
ing environments. Paper presented to EDGE 2010 — e-Learning: The Horizon and 
Beyond, Newfoundland, October. 
Knox, J. (2012). Five critiques of the open educational resources movement. http://jeremyknox. 
net/2012/03/28/five-critiques-of-the-open-educational-resources-movement-oer- 
highered-elearning-edtech/ 
Kogut, B., & Metiu,A. (2001). Open-source software development and distributed innova- 
tion. Oxford Review of Economic Policy, 17(2), 248-264. 
Kontour, K. (2012). The governmentality of battlefield space: Efficiency, proficiency, and 
masculine performativity. Bulletin of Science Technology & Society, 32(5), 353-360. 
Kozel, J. (1968). Death at an early age. Harmondsworth: Penguin. 
Krapp, P. (2011). Noise channels: Glitch and error in digital culture. Minneapolis: University of 
Minnesota Press. 
Kullman, K., & Lee, N. (2012). Liberation from/liberation within: Examining One Laptop 
per Child with Amartya Sen and Bruno Latour. In I. Oosterlaken & J. van den Hoven 
(Eds.), The capability approach, technology and design philosophy of engineering and technology 
(pp. 39-55). Berlin: Springer. 
Laclau, E., & Mouffe, C. (1985). Hegemony and socialist strategy: Towards a radical democratic 
politics. London: Verso. 

=== PAGE 192 ===
178 
References 
Lakhani, K., & von Hippel, E. (2003). How open source software works: ‘Free’ user-to-user 
assistance. Research Policy, 32(6), 923-943. 
Lameras, P,, Paraskakis, I., & Levy, P. (2009). Using social software for teaching and learn- 
ing in higher education. In S. Hatzipanagos & S. Warburton (Eds.), Handbook of research 
on social software and developing community ontologies (pp. 1045-1060). Hershey, PA: IGI. 
Lancashire, D, (2001). Code, culture and cash: The fading altruism of open source develop- 
ment. First Monday, 6(12). www.firstmonday.org/issues/issue6_12/lancashire/ 
Lanier, J. (2010). You are not a gadget. London: Allen Lane. 
Lankshear, C., & Knobel, M. (2007). Sampling ‘the new’ in new literacies. In C. Lankshear & 
M. Knobel (Eds.), A new literacies sampler (pp. 1-24). New York: Peter Lang. 
Larrain, J. (2007). Ideology and hegemony. In P. Scott (Ed.), Sociology (pp. 85-88). London: 
Routledge. 
Lasch, C. (1987). Technology andi its critics: The degradation of the practical arts. In S. Gold- 
berg & C. Strain (Eds.), Technological change and the transformation of America (pp. 79-90). 
Carbondale: Southern Illinois Press. 
Lauder, H., Brown, P., & Halsey, A. (2009). Sociology of education: A critical history and 
prospects for the future. Oxford Review of Education, 35(5), 569-585. 
Leadbeater, C. (2008). People power transforms the web in next online revolution. Observer, 
9 March. www.guardian.co.uk/technology/2008/mar/09/internet.web20 
Lee, M., & McLoughlin, C. (2010). Web 2.0-based e- eae: Hershey, PA: Information Sci- 
ence Reference. 
Lee, N., & Motzkau, J. (2014). Tweak: Biosocial imaginations and educational futures. In 
N. Selwyn & K. Facer (Eds.), The politics of education and technology: Conflicts, controversies 
and connections. 
New York: Palgrave Macmillan. 
Lefebvre, H. (2003). The urban revolution. Translated by R. Bononno. Minneapolis: Minne- 
sota Press (Original work published 1970). 
Lefebvre, H. (2004). Rhythmanalysis: Space, time and everyday life. Translated by S. Elden & 
G. Moore. London: Continuum (Original work published 1992). 
Lefebvre, H. (2007). Critique of everyday life: Volume three — From modernity to modernism. 
Translated by G. Elliott. London:Verso (Original work published 1981). 
Lefebvre, H. (2009). The state in the modern world. In N. Brenner & S. Elden (Eds.), 
State, space world: Selected essays (pp. 95-122). Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press 
(Original work published 1976). 
Lerner, 
J., & Tirole, J. (2002). Some simple economics of open source. Journal of Industrial 
Economics, 50(2), 197-234. 
Lessig, L. (2002). The future of ideas: The fate of the commons in a connected world. New York: 
Random House. 
Levidow, L. (2005). Neoliberal agenda for higher education. In A. Saad-Filho & D. Johnston 
(Eds.), Neoliberalism: A critical reader (pp. 156-162). London: Pluto. 
Levy, S. (1984). Hackers: Heroes of the computer revolution. Garden City, NY: Anchor Press. 
Lewin, D, (2011). Technology and the good life: Suggestions for a theological turn in the 
philosophy of technology. Techné, 15(2), 82-95. 
Lewthwaite, S. (2011). Student experiences of social networking and disability in higher education 
(Unpublished doctoral thesis, University of Nottingham), 
Lilla, M. (2010). The Tea Party Jacobins. New York Review of Books, 27 May. www.nybooks 
.com/articles/archives/2010/may/27/tea-party-jacobins/ 
Lister, I. (1974). Deschooling. Harmondsworth: Penguin. 
Livingstone, S. (2012). Critical reflections on the benefits of ICT in education. Oxford 
Review of Education, 38(1), 9-24. 

=== PAGE 193 ===
References 
179 
Locke, J. (2010). Second treatise of government. New York: MobileReference (Original work 
published 1690). 
Logstrup, K. (1997). The ethical demand. Notre Dame: University of Notre Dame Press. 
Lovejoy, M. (2004). Digital currents. London: Routledge. 
Lovink, G. (2011). Networks without a cause: A critique of social media. Cambridge: Polity. 
Luckin, R. (2010). Re-designing learning contexts: Technology-rich, learner-centred ecologies. Lon- 
don: Routledge. 
Lukes, S. (2005). Power: A radical view. 2nd ed. Basingstoke: Palgrave Macmillan (Original 
work published 1974). 
Luyt, B. (2008). The One Laptop per Child project and the negotiation of technologi- 
cal meaning. First Monday, 13(6). http://firstmonday.org/htbin/cgiwrap/bin/ojs/index 
.php/fm/article/view/2144/1971 
Lyon, D. (1988). The information society: Issues and illusions. Cambridge: Polity. 
MacKinnon, R. (2012). Consent of the networked. 
New York: Basic Books. 
Magatti, M. (2012). Contemporary sociological theory and techno-nihilist capitalism. 
World Futures: The Journal of Global Education, 68(4—5), 296-313. 
Mager, 
A. (2012). Algorithmic ideology. Information, Communication & Society, 15(5), 769-787. 
Maguire, M.. Perryman, J., Ball, S., & Braun, A. (2011). The ordinary school: What is it? 
British Journal of Sociology of Education, 32(1), 1-16. 
Mandiberg, M. (2012). The social media reader. 
New York: New York University Press. 
Mansell, R. (2004). Political economy, power and new media. New Media & Society, 6(1), 
96-105. 
Mansell, R. (2006). Collective action, institutionalism, and the internet. Journal of Economic 
Issues, 40(2), 297-305. 
Mansell, R., & Berdou, E. (2010). Political economy, the internet and FL/OSS develop- 
ment. In J. Hunsinger, L. Klastrup, & M. Allen (Eds.), International handbook of internet 
research (pp. 341-361). Berlin: Springer. 
Maraizzi, C. (2011). Capital and affects: The politics of the language economy. Translated by 
G. Mecchia. Los Angeles: Semiotext(e) (Original work published 1994). 
March, 
J., & Olsen, J. (1995). Democratic governance. 
New York: Free Press. 
Marco, J., Cerezo, E., Baldasarri, S., Mazzone, E., & Read, J. (2009). User-oriented design 
and tangible interaction for kindergarten children. Paper presented to the 8th Interna- 
tional Conference on Interaction Design and Children, Como, 3-5 June. 
Margaryan, 
A., Littlejohn, 
A., & Vojt, G. (2011). Are digital natives a myth or reality? Com- 
puters & Education, 56, 429-440. 
Markoff, J. (2005). What the dormouse said: How the sixties counterculture shaped the personal 
computer. London: Penguin. 
Marsh, R., Carr-Chellman, A., & Sockman, B. (2009). Selecting silicon: Why parents 
choose cybercharter schools. Tech Trends, 53(4), 32-36. 
Martin, J. (2012). Game on: The challenges and benefits of video games. Bulletin of Science 
Technology & Society, 32(5), 343-344. 
Marx, L. (1994). The idea of ‘technology’ and postmodern pessimism. In R. Smith & 
L. Marx (Eds.), Does technology drive history? The dilemma of technological determinism 
(pp. 237-258). Cambridge, MA: MIT. 
Mason, M. (2006). The pirate’s dilemma: How hackers, punk capitalists, graffiti millionaires and 
other youth movements are remixing our culture and changing our world. Harmondsworth: 
Penguin. 
Mason, R., & Rennie, E (2007). Using web 2.0 for learning in the community. Internet and 
Higher Education, 10, 196-203. 

=== PAGE 194 ===
180 
References 
Massumi, B. (2002). Parables of the virtual: Movements, affect, sensation. Durham, NC: Duke 
University Press. 
Matthewman, S. (2011). Technology and social theory. London: Sage. 
May, C. (2006). Escaping the TRIPs’ trap: The political economy of free and open source 
software in Africa. Political Studies, 54(1), 123-146. 
Mayer, A., & Puller, S. (2008). The old boy (and girl) network. Journal of Public Economics, 
92(1-2), 329-347. 
McCarthy, C. (2011). Afterword. In M. Peters & E. Bulut (Eds.), Cognitive capitalism, educa- 
tion and digital labour (pp. 301-321). Berlin: Peter Lang. 
McGonigal, J. (2011). Reality is broken: Why games make us better and how they can change the 
world. London: Vintage. 
McKnight, J. (2012). A failure of Convivencia: Democracy and discourse conflicts in a vir- 
tual government. Bulletin of Science Technology & Society, 32(5), 361-374. 
Means, 
A. (2011). Creativity as an educational problematic within the biopolitical economy. 
In M. Peters & E. Bulut (Eds.), Cognitive capitalism, education and digital labour (pp. 211— 
228). Berlin: Peter Lang. 
Means, B., Toyama, 
Y., Murphy, R., Bakia, M., & Jones, K. (2009). Evaluation of evidence-based 
practice in online learning. Washington, DC: US Department of Education. 
Menchen-Trevino, E., & Hargittai, E. (2011). Young adults’ credibility assessment of Wiki- 
pedia. Information, Communication & Society, 14(1), 24-51. 
Meneses, 
J., & Mominé, J. (2010). Putting digital literacy in practice: How schools con- 
tribute to digital inclusion in the network society. Information Society, 
26(3), 197-208. 
Meng, B., & Wu, E (2013). Commons/commodity. Information, Communication & Society, 
16(1), 125-145. 
Menzies, H. (1998). Challenging capitalism in cyberspace. In R. McChesney, E. Wood, & 
J. Foster (Eds.), Capitalism and the information age (pp? 87—98). New York: Monthly Re- 
view Press. 
Merchant, G. (2012). Unravelling the social network: Theory and research. Learning, Media 
and Technology, 37(1), 4-19. 
Miller, D. (2011). Tales from Facebook. Cambridge: Polity. 
Miller, T. (2011). For fun, for profit, for empire: The university and electronic games. In 
M. Peters & E. Bulut (Eds.), Cognitive capitalism, education and digital labour (pp. 229-244). 
Berlin: Peter Lang. 
Miller, V. (2011). Understanding digital culture. London, Sage. 
Miron, G., & Urschel, J. (2012). Understanding and improving full-time virtual schools: A study 
of student characteristics, school finance, and school performance in schools operated by K12 Inc. 
Boulder, CO: National Education Policy Centre. 
Misztal, B. (2000). Informality: Social theory and contemporary practice. London: Routledge. 
Monahan, T. (2005). Globalization, technological change, and public education. London: Routledge. 
Mosco,V. (2004). The digital sublime: Myth, power and cyberspace. Cambridge, MA: MIT. 
Moseley, 
A. (2007). An introduction to political philosophy. London: Continuum. 
Moskaliuk, 
J., Kimmerle, J., & Cress, U. (2009). Wiki-supported learning and knowledge 
building. Journal of Computer Assisted Learning, 25(6), 549-561. 
Mozilla. (2012). Open badges for lifelong learning. https://wiki.mozilla.org/images/b/b1/ 
OpenBadges-Working-Paper_092011.pdf 
Mulder, 
A. (2007). The thinking-feeling of what happens: 
An interview with Brian Mas- 
sumi. In J. Brouwer & A. Mulder (Eds.), Interact or die (pp. 70-91). Rotterdam: NAi. 
Munck, R. (2005). Neoliberalism and politics, and the politics of neoliberalism. In 
A. Saad-Filho & D. Johnston (Eds.), Neoliberalism:A critical reader (pp. 60-69). London: 
Pluto. 

=== PAGE 195 ===
References 
181 
Murdock, G. (2004). Past the posts: Rethinking change, retrieving critique. European Journal 
of Communication, 19(1), 19-38. 
Murphy, D. (2012). The architecture of failure. Winchester: Zero. 
Nakamura, L. (2002). Cybertypes: Race, ethnicity, and identity on the internet. London: Routledge. 
Naughton, J. (2012). From Gutenberg to Zuckerberg: What you really need to know about the 
internet. London: Quercus. 
Negri, A. (1984). Marx beyond Marx: Lessons on the Grundrisse. New York: Bergen & 
Garvey. 
Negri, 
A. (1999), Insurgencies: Constituent power and the modern state. Minneapolis: University 
of Minnesota Press. 
Nelson, B., & Erlandson, B. (2012). Design for learning in virtual worlds. 
New York: Routledge. 
Nelson, M. (2012). Soviet and American precursors to the gamification of work. Proceedings 
of the 16th International Academic Mind Trek Conference. http://ssrn.com/abstract=2115483 
Newman, J. (2004). Videogames. London: Routledge. 
Nicholas, D., Gunter, B., & Rowlands, I. (2009). The Google generation. Oxford: Chandos. 
Niedere, S., & van Dijck, J. (2010). Wisdom of the crowd or technicity of content? Wikipe- 
dia as a socio-technical system. New Media & Society, 12(8), 1368-1387. 
Nissenbaum, H. (2004). Hackers and the contested ontology of cyberspace. New Media & 
Society, 6(2), 195-217. 
Njenga, J., & Fourie, L. (2010). The myths about e-learning in higher education. British 
Journal of Educational Technology, 41(2), 199-212. 
Noble, D. (2002). Digital diploma mills: The automation of higher education. 
New York: Monthly 
Review Press. 
Nye, D. (1996). The American technological sublime. Cambridge, MA: MIT. 
Nye, D. (2007). Technology matters: Questions to live with. Cambridge, MA: MIT. 
Nygren, K., & Gidlund, K. (2012). The pastoral power of technology: Rethinking alien- 
ation in digital culture. tripleC, 10(2), 509-517. 
Obama, B. (2011). State of the Union address. Washington, DC: Office of the President. 
Oliver, M. (2011). Technological determinism in educational technology research: Some 
alternative ways of thinking about the relationship between learning and technology. 
Journal of Computer Assisted Learning, 27(5), 373-384. 
Olson, M. (1971). The logic of collective action: Public goods and the theory of groups. Cambridge, 
MA: Harvard University Press. 
Olssen, M. (2009). Toward a global thin community: Nietzsche, Foucault and the cosmopolitan 
community. London: Paradigm. 
Olssen, M. (2010). Liberalism, neoliberalism, social democracy: 
Thin communitarian perspectives on 
political philosophy and education. London: Routledge. 
O'Reilly, T. (2005). What is web 2.0? Design patterns and business models for the next generation 
of software. www.oreillynet.com. 
O'Reilly, T. (2007). Tim O’Reilly on web 2.0 and education: Interview with Steve Hargadon. 26 
April. www.stevehargadon.com/2007/05/tim-oreilly-on-web-20-and-education.html 
Oudshoorn, N., & Pinch, 
T. (2003). How users matter. Cambridge, MA: MIT. 
Owen, M., Grant, L., Sayers, S., & Facer, K. (2006). Social software and learning. Bristol: Futurelab. 
Owston, R. (2009). Digital immersion, teacher learning, and games. Educational Researcher, 
38, 270-273. 
Ozga, J. (2009). Governing education through data in England. Journal of Education Policy, 
24(2), 149-162. 
Palfrey, J., & Gasser, U. (2011). Reclaiming an awkward term: What might we learn from 
‘digital natives’? In M.Thomas (Ed.), Deconstructing digital natives (pp. 186-204). London: 
Routledge. 

=== PAGE 196 ===
182 
References 
Palley, T. (2005). From Keynesianism to Neoliberalism: Shifting paradigms in economics. In A. 
Saad-Filho & D. Johnston (Eds.), Neoliberalism: A critical reader (pp. 20-29). London: Pluto. 
Papacharissi, Z. (2002). 
The virtual sphere: 
The internet as a public sphere. New Media & 
Society, 4(1), 9-27. 
Papacharissi, Z. (2010). A networked self. London: Routledge. 
Papert, S. (1980). Mindstorms: Children, computers, and powerful ideas. New York: Basic Books. 
Papert, S. (2002). Hard fun. www.papert.org/articles/HardFun.html 
Pariser, E. (2011). The filter bubble: What the internet is hiding from you. Harmondsworth: 
Penguin. 
Parsons, J., & Taylor, L. (2011). Student engagement: What do we know and what should we 
do? University of Alberta. www.education.alberta.ca/media/.../student_engagement_ 
literature_review_2011.pdf 
Pelletier, C. (2009). Games and learning: What’s the connection? International Journal of 
Learning and Media, 1(1), 83-101. 
Pentzold, C. (2010). Imagining the Wikipedia community: What do Wikipedia authors 
mean when they write about their ‘community’? New Media & Society, 13(5), 704-721. 
Perens, B. (1998). Open source definition. http://ldp.dvo.ru/LDP/LGNET/issue26/perens. html 
Perrotta, C. (2011). Ubiquitous learning vs. the value of boundaries. In C. Delgado-Kloos 
(Ed.), EC-TEL 2011 proceedings (pp. 9-14). Berlin: Springer-Verlag. 
Peters, M. (2011). Neoliberalism and after: Education, social policy and the crisis of Western capital- 
ism. Berlin: Peter Lang. 
: 
Peters, M., & Bulut, E. (2011). Introduction. In M. Peters & E. Bulut (Eds.), Cognitive capital- 
ism, education and digital labour (pp. xxv—xl). Berlin: Peter Lang. 
Peters, M., & Roberts, P. (2011). The virtues of openness: Education and scholarship in a digital 
age. Boulder, CO: Paradigm. 
Petrina, S. (2005). How (and why) digital diploma mills (don’t) work. Workplace, 7(1), 38-59. 
Phillips, L. (2010). I fought Delors (and Delors won). Guardian, 7 August, p. 18. 
Picciano, A., & Spring, J. (2013). The great American education-industrial complex: Ideology, 
technology and profit. London: Routledge. 
Popkewitz, T. (1987). Critical studies in teacher education: Its folklore, theory and practice. Brigh- 
ton: Falmer Press. 
Postman, N. (1992). Technopoly: The surrender of culture to technology. 
New York: Vintage. 
Prensky, M. (2005). Listen to the natives. Educational Leadership, 63(4), 8-13. 
Prey, R. (2012). The network’s blindspot: Exclusion, exploitation and Marx’s process- 
relational ontology. tripleC, 10(2), 253-273. 
Pring, R. (2010). The need for a wider vision of learning. International Studies in Sociology 
of Education, 20(1), 83-91. 
Quitney, 
J., & Rainie, L. (2012). Gameification. Washington, DC: Pew Internet and American 
Life Project. 
Radin, M. (2005). Contested commodities. In M. Ertman & J. Williams (Eds.), Rethinking 
commodification (pp. 81-95). 
New York: New York University Press. 
Radin, M., & Sunder, M. (2005). The subject and object of commodification. In M. Ert- 
man & J. Williams (Eds.), Rethinking commodification (pp. 8-32). New York: New York 
University Press. 
Rainie, L., & Wellman, B. (2012). Networked: The new social operating system. Cambridge, 
MA: MIT. 
Ravenscroft, A. (2009). Social software, 
Web 2.0 and learning: Status and implications of an 
evolving paradigm. Journal of Computer Assisted Learning, 25(1), 1-5. 

=== PAGE 197 ===
References 
183 
Raymond, E. (1998a). 
The cathedral and the bazaar. First Monday, 3(3). www.firstmonday 
.org/issues/issue3_3/Raymond 
Raymond, E. (1998b). Homesteading the noosphere. First Monday, 3(10). www-firstmon 
day.org/issues/issue3_10/Raymond 
Reilly, P. (2011). ‘Anti-social’ networking in Northern Ireland: Policy responses to young 
people’s use of social media for organizing anti-social behaviour. Policy & Internet, 3(1), 
Article 7. www.psocommons.org/policyandinternet/vol3/iss1/art7 
Reimer, E. (1971). School is dead. Harmondsworth: Penguin. 
Rhoads, R., Berdan, 
J., & Toven-Lindsey, B. (2013). The open courseware movement in 
higher education: Unmasking power and raising questions about the movement’s dem- 
ocratic potential. Educational Theory, 63(1), 87-109. 
Rifkin, J. (2000). The age of access. Harmondsworth: Penguin. 
Ritzer, G., & Jurgenson, N. (2010). Production, consumption, prosumption: 
The nature of 
capitalism in the age of the digital prosumer. Journal of Consumer Culture, 10(1), 13-26. 
Robertson, J. (2010). Gendering humanoid robots: Robo-sexism in Japan. Body & Society, 
16(2), 1-36. 
Rose, C. (2005). Whither commodification. In M. Ertman & J. Williams (Eds.), Rethinking 
commodification (pp. 402—428). New York: New York University Press. 
Rosenfeld, E. (2007). Beginning the conversation about education 2.0. Teacher Librarian, 
34(4), 6. 
Roszak, T. (1994). The cult of information. 2nd ed. Berkeley: University of California Press. 
Ruckenstein, M. (2011). Children in creationist capitalism: The corporate value of sociality. 
Information, Communication & Society, 14(7), 1060-1076. 
Rutten, N., van Joolingen, 
W., & van der Veen, J. (2012). The learning effects of computer 
simulations in science education. Computers & Education, 58, 136-153. 
Saad-Filho, 
A., & Johnston, D. (2005). Introduction. In A. Saad-Filho & D. Johnston (Eds.), 
Neoliberalism: A critical reader (pp. 1-6). London: Pluto. 
Salen, K. (2008). Toward an ecology of gaming. In Salen, K. (Ed.), The ecology of games: Con- 
necting youth, games and learning (pp. 1-20). Cambridge, MA: MIT. 
Salen, K., Torres, 
R., Wolozin, L., Rufo-Tepper, R., & Shapiro, A. (2011). Quest to learn. 
Chicago: Macarthur Foundation. 
Sandel, M. (2012). What money can’t buy: The moral limits of markets. London: Allen Lane. 
Sassen, S. (2006). Territory, authority, rights: From medieval to global assemblages. Princeton, NJ: 
Princeton University Press. 
Savat, D. (2009). Introduction. In M. Poster & D. Savat (Eds.), Deleuze and new technology (pp. 
1-13). Edinburgh: Edinburgh University Press. 
Schoonmaker, S. (2012). Hacking the global. Information, Communication & Society, 15(4), 
502-518. 
Schradie, J. (2009). 
The digital production gap: The digital divide and Web 2.0 collide. Poet- 
ics, 39(2), 145-168. 
Schuck, S., & Aubusson, P. (2010). Educational scenarios for digital futures. Learning, Media 
and Technology, 35(3), 293-305. 
Scott, J. 
(1990). Domination and the arts of resistance. New Haven, CT:Yale University Press. 
Scott, J. (2001). Power. Cambridge: Polity. 
Seely-Brown, J., & Adler, R. (2008). Minds on fire: Open education, the long tail, and 
learning 2.0. Educause Review, 43(1), 16-32. 
Sefton-Green, J. (2004). Literature review in informal learning with technology outside school. 
Bristol: Futurelab. 

=== PAGE 198 ===
184 
References 
Selwood, I., & Visscher, A. (2007). The potential of school information systems for enhanc- 
ing school improvement. In N. Soguel & P. 
Jaccard (Eds.), Governance and performance of 
education systems (pp. 269-288). New York: Springer. 
Selwyn, N. (2011). Education and technology: Key issues and debates. London: Continuum. 
Sen, 
A. (1999). Development as freedom. Oxford: Oxford University Press. 
Senechal, D. (2012). Republic of noise: 
The loss of solitude in schools and culture. Lanham, MD: 
Rowman & Littlefield. 
Sennett, R. (1998). The corrosion of character: 
The personal consequences of work in the new capital- 
ism. London: 
W. W. Norton. 
Sennett, R. (2008). Craftsmen. London: Allen Lane. 
Sennett, R. (2012). Together: The ritual, pleasures and politics of cooperation. London: Allen Lane. 
Sevignani, S. (2012). The problem of privacy in capitalism and the alternative social net- 
working site diaspora. tripleC, 10(2), 600-617. 
Shah, S. (2006). Motivation, governance, and the viability of hybrid forms in open source 
software development. Management Science, 52(7), 1000-1014. 
Sharpe, R. (2009). Inequalities in the globalized knowledge-based economy. In J. Burnett, 
P. Senker, & K. Walker (Eds.), The myths of technology (pp. 39-52). Berlin: Peter Lang. 
Shields, R. (2003). The virtual. London: Routledge. 
Shirky, C. (1998). Short takes on Linux. www.shirky.com/writings/short_takes.html 
Shirky, C. (1999). The interest horizons and the limits of software love. www.shirky.com/writ 
ings/interest.html 
: 
Shirky, C. (2008). Here comes everybody. London: Allen Lane. 
Siemens, G. (2004). Connectivism: A learning theory for the digital age. www.elearnspace. 
org/Articles/connectivism.htm 
Sigman, 
A. (2009). Well connected. Biologist, 56(1), 14-20. 
Silva, S. (2012). Buy and share! Social network games anid ludic shopping. Paper presented 
to DiGRA Nordic 2012 Conference, Tampare, June, 
Simon, H. (1971). Designing organizations for an information-rich world. In M. Green- 
berger (Ed.), Computers, communication and the public interest (pp. 37-72). Baltimore, MD: 
Johns Hopkins Press. 
Skoric, M., Teo, L., & Neo, R. (2009). Children and video games: Addiction, engagement, 
and scholastic achievement. CyberPsychology & Behavior, 
12(5): 567-572. 
Smith, P. (2010). Review of Olssen: Liberalism, neoliberalism, social democracy. British 
Journal of Sociology of Education, 31(4), 509-514. 
Smyth, J. (2011). Critical pedagogy for social justice. London: Continuum. 
Smythe, D. (1977). Communications: Blindspot of Western Marxism. Canadian Journal of 
Political and Social Theory, 1(3), 1-27. 
Solomon, G., & Schrum, L. (2007). Web 2.0: New tools, new schools. Washington, DC: Inter- 
national Society for Technology in Education. 
Song, E (2008). Social networking sites: Mirrors of contemporary individualism. Culture, 
2(1). www.iasc-culture.org/eNews/2008_04/Song_CultureSpring08.pdf 
Song, F (2010). Theorizing web 2.0. Information, Communication & Society, 13(2), 249-275. 
Spring, J. (2012). Education networks: Power, wealth, cyberspace and the digital mind. London: 
Routledge. 
Squire, K. (2006). From content to context: Videogames as designed experience. Educational 
Researcher, 35(8), 19-29. 
Staetsky, L. (2009). Individual voluntary participation in the United Kingdom. Third Sector Re- 
search Centre Working Paper 6, University of Southampton. 

=== PAGE 199 ===
References 
185 
Stallabrass, J. (1996). Gargantua: Manufactured mass culture. London: Verso. 
Standish, P. (2008). Preface. Journal of Philosophy of Education, 42(3—4), 349-353. 
Stenros, J. (2012). In defence of a magic circle: The social and mental boundaries of play. 
Paper presented to DiGRA Nordic 2012 Conference, Tampare, June. 
Stiegler, B. (2009). For a new critique of political economy. Cambridge: Polity. 
Strathern, M. (2002). Abstraction and decontextualization. In S. Woolgar (Ed.), Virtual soci- 
ety? Technology, cyberbole, reality (pp. 302-313). Oxford: Oxford University Press. 
Straube, T. (2012). Towards an understanding of virtual place (Unpublished MA thesis, Johann 
Wolfgang Goethe-Universitat Frankfurt am Main Institut fiir Humangeographie). 
Streeter, T. (1999). That deep romantic chasm: Liberalism, neoliberalism and the com- 
puter culture. In A. Calabrese & J. Burgelman (Eds.), Communication, citizenship, and 
social policy: Re-thinking the limits of the welfare state (pp. 49-64). New York: Rowman & 
Littlefield. 
Streeter, T. (2003).The romantic self and the politics of internet commercialization. Cultural 
Studies, 17(5), 648-668. 
Subrahmanyam, K., & Smahel, D. (2011). Digital youth. Berlin: Springer. 
Sudnow, D. (2000). Pilgrim in the microworld. http://facstaff. www.edu/fishburj/150/readings/ 
PMW.pdf 
Suoranta, 
J., & Vadén, 
T. (2010). Wikiworld. London: Pluto. 
Swain, H. (2009). Dawn of the cyberstudent. Guardian, 20 January, ‘University challenge’ 
supplement, p. 1. 
: 
Tapscott, D., & Williams, A. (2010). Wikinomics: How mass collaboration changes everything. 
London: Atlantic. 
Taylor, C. (2004). Modern social imaginaries. Durham, NC: Duke University Press. 
Terranova, T. (2004). Networked culture: Politics for the information age. London: Pluto. 
Thomas, D., & Seely-Brown, J. (2011).A new culture of learning. Charleston, SC: Createspace. 
Thomas, M. (2011). Technology, education and the discourse of the digital native. In 
M. Thomas (Ed.), Deconstructing digital natives (pp. 1-14). London: Routledge. 
Thompson, 
J. (1990). Ideology and modern culture: Critical social theory in the era of mass com- 
munication. Cambridge: Polity. 
Thrift, N. (1997). The rise of soft capitalism. Cultural Values, 1(1), 29-57. 
Tiffin, 
J., & Rajasingham, L. (1995). In search of the virtual class: Education in an information 
society. London: Routledge. 
Tooley, J. (2006). Education reclaimed. In P. Booth (Ed.), Towards a liberal utopia? (pp. 22-30). 
London: Continuum. 
Tronti, M. (2012). Our operaismo. New Left Review, 73, January/February. http://newleft 
review. org/II/73/mario-tronti-our-operaismo 
Turner, F (2006). From counterculture to cyberculture. Chicago: University of Chicago Press. 
Tyack, D., & Tobin, 
W. (1995). The ‘grammar’ of schooling: Why has it been so hard to 
change? American Educational Research Journal, 31(3), 453-479. 
Ulbrich, EF, Jahnke, I., & Mortensson, P. (2010). Guest editorial preface. International Journal 
of Sociotechnology and Knowledge Development, 2(4), ii. 
Vaidhyanathan, S. (2011). The Googlization of everything (and why we should worry). Berkeley: 
University of California Press. 
van de Bunt-Kokhuis, S. (2004). Globalization and the freedom of knowledge. Higher 
Education in Europe, 29, 269-284. 
van Dijck, J. (2009). Users like you? Theorizing agency in user-generated content. Media, 
Culture & Society, 31(1), 41-58. 

=== PAGE 200 ===
186 
References 
van Eck, R. (2006). Digital game-based learning: It’s not just the digital natives who are 
restless. Educause Review, 41(2), 16-30. 
Vercellone, C. (2007). From formal subsumption to general intellect: Elements for a Marx- 
ist reading of the thesis of cognitive capitalism. Historical Materialism, 15(1), 13-36. 
Volti, R. (1992). Society and technological change. 2nd ed. New York: St Martin’s Press. 
von Hippel, E. (2005). Democratizing innovation. Cambridge, MA: MIT. 
Waern, A. (2012). Framing games. Paper presented to DiGRA Nordic 2012 Conference, 
‘Tampare, June. 
Wang, Q., Woo, H., Quek, C., Yang, Y., & Liu, M. (2012). Using the Facebook group as a 
learning management system: 
An exploratory study. British Journal of Educational Technol- 
ogy, 43(3), 428-438. 
Wang, S., & Chern, J. (2008). The new era of ‘school 2.0’ — Teaching with pleasure, not 
pressure. In Proceedings of world conference on educational multimedia, hypermedia and telecom- 
munications 2008 (pp. 3319-3327). Chesapeake, 
VA: Association for the Advancement of 
Computing in Education. 
Waring, 
T., & Maddocks, P. (2005). Open source software implementation in the UK public 
sector: Evidence from the field and implications for the future. International Journal of 
Information Management, 25(5), 411-428. 
Wark, M. (2007). Gamer theory. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press. 
Watson, 
J., Gemin, B., & Ryan, J. (2008). Keeping pace with K-12 online learning 2008:A re- 
view of state-level policy and practice. Philadelphia, PA: Evergreen Consulting. 
Waycott, 
J., Bennett, S. Kennedy, G., Dalgarno, B., & Gray, K. (2010). Digital divides? Com- 
puters and Education, 54(4), 1202-1211. 
Weber, S. (2000). The political economy of open source software. BRIE Working Paper 140, 
Department of Political Science, University of =: CA. http://e-conomy. berkeley 
.edu/publications/wp/wp140.pdf 
Weller, 
J., Nestel, D., Marshall, S., Brooks, P., & Conn, J. (2012). Simulation in clinical teach- 
ing and learning. Medical Journal of Australia, 196(9), 594-599. 
Wessels, B. (2010). Understanding the internet. Basingstoke: Palgrave Macmillan. 
Williams, R. (1958). Culture and society. Harmondsworth: Penguin. 
Williams, R. (1980). Keywords: A vocabulary of culture and society. London: Fontana. 
Williams, R. (1985). Keywords: A vocabulary of culture and society. Rev. ed. Oxford: Oxford 
University Press. 
Williams, S. (2002). Free as in freedom: Richard Stallman’s crusade for free software. Sebastopol, 
CA: O’Reilly. 
Williamson, B. (2014). Networked cosmopolitanism? Shaping learners by remaking the 
curriculum of the future. In N. Selwyn & K. Facer (Eds.), The politics of education and tech- 
nology: Conflicts, controversies and connections (pp. 39-59) New York: Palgrave Macmillan. 
Willinsky, J. (2009). Forward. In C.Vrasidas, M. Zembylas, & G. Glass (Eds.), ICT for educa- 
tion, development and social justice (pp. xi-xiv). Charlotte, NC: Information Age. 
Willsher, K. (2011). Rupert Murdoch uses eG8 to talk up net’s power to transform educa- 
tion. Guardian, 24 May. 
Winner, L. (1997). Cyberlibertarian myths and the prospects for community. Computers and 
Society, 27(3), 14-19. 
Winner, L. (2004). Technology as forms of life. In D. Kaplan (Ed.), Readings in the philosophy 
of technology (pp. 289-302). Oxford: Rowman & Littlefield. 
Wise, R. (2000). Multimedia: A critical introduction. London: Routledge. 
Woolgar, S. (2002). Five rules of virtuality. In S. Woolgar (Ed.), Virtual society? Technology, 
cyberbole, reality (pp. 1-22). Oxford: Oxford University Press. 

=== PAGE 201 ===
References 
187 
Wray, R. (2010). Creating the next dotcom boom could be child’s play. Observer, 25 April, 
p. 49. 
Wresch, 
W. (2004). Review article: The information age. Information Society, 20, 71-72. 
WSIS [World Summit on the Information Society] (2005). Knowledge societies, http:// 
www.itu.int/wsis/documents/background.asp?lang=en&theme=ks 
Wynne, B. (1996). May the sheep safely graze? A reflexive view of the expert—lay knowl- 
edge divide. In S. Lash, B. Szerszynski, & B. Wynne (Eds.), Risk, environment and moder- 
nity: Towards a new ecology (pp. 44-83). London: SAGE. 
Yu, A., Tian, S., Vogel, D., & Kwok, R. (2010). Embedded social learning in online social 
networking. ICIS 2010 Proceedings. http://aisel.aisnet.org/icis2010_submissions/100 
Ziegler, S. (2007). The (mis)education of Generation M. Learning, Media and Technology, 
32(1), 69-81. 
Zimmerman E., & Salen, K. (2003). Rules of play: Game design fundamentals. Cambridge, 
MA: MIT. 
Zizek, S. (2008). In defense of lost causes. London: Verso. 
Zizek, S., & Daly, G. (2004). Conversations with Slavoj Zizek. Cambridge: Polity. 
Zuboff, S. (1988). In the age of the smart machines. 
New York: Basic Books. 
Zuckerberg, M. (2010). We are building a web where the default is social. Techcrunch, 
21 April. http://techcrunch.com/2010/04/21/zuckerbergs-buildin-web-default-social 

=== PAGE 202 ===
& 
(
' 
’ 
2 
~ 
r 
‘ 
R 
fa 

=== PAGE 203 ===
INDEX 
academic research (into educational 
technology) 160-63 
algorithm/algorithmic 30, 38, 86, 99-100, 
104, 126, 130 
alienation 31, 114, 135 
Apperley, Tom 86, 90, 93, 97, 98, 100, 103, 
104 
Apple, Michael 32, 43, 73, 146 
attention economy/affective economy 121, 
128, 133 
audience commodity 120, 129 
autonomist Marxism 29 
Bauman, Zygmunt 24, 56, 118, 123, 132, 
137, 141, 152, 154 
booster discourses 9, 74, 88, 130 
class (social class) 21, 22, 55, 138, 139, 146, 
162, 164, 165 
cognitive 8, 11, 33, 47, 88, 93, 113, 157 
cognitive capitalism 30 
collaboration 26, 33, 35-36, 49, 54, 60, 65, 
66, 68, 70-74, 76, 82, 99, 107, 109, 113, 
2 al 4 
Sealing 
commercial 2, 6, 34, 38, 49, 51, 54-66, 67, 
71, 79, 89, 119-20, 122, 128, 136, 159 
commodification 30, 80, 82, 100-102, 104, 
119, 120-23, 129, 150 
communal 28, 40, 69, 73, 75-76, 108, 
116-18, 131-32, 142, 149 
communitarianism 7, 35—36, 108, 149-50 
competition 28, 35, 51, 75, 80, 92, 99, 102, 
121, 131-32, 135 
consumer 2, 22, 30, 54, 61, 101, 118-19, 
122-24, 151-52 
control 19, 26, 34, 57, 61-63, 78, 98, 
100-101, 104, 137, 139, 153, 158 
counter-culture 35—36, 38-39, 80, 161 
data 7, 34, 50, 52, 54, 58-60, 70, 119-20, 134 
Dean, Jodi 17, 36, 37, 135, 145 
dehumanization 21, 60, 134-35 
de-institutionalism/anti-institutionalism 
36-37, 39, 80, 128 
democratizing nature of technology 7, 52, 
62,71, 72, 82, 89, 107, 117, 136-38, 
148-50 
deskilling 53, 60-62, 72, 141 
disembodiment 60, 134 
doomster discourses 9, 96, 130 
economics 28, 33, 34, 80, 82, 147 
elites 19, 29, 48, 63, 66, 71, 77, 79, 82, 106, 
111, 119, 126, 137, 139, 140, 148, 155 
empowerment 3, 19, 26, 34, 59, 65, 79, 
102, 109, 122, 139 
entrepreneurial spirit 26-28, 36, 59, 127, 
139, 140 
exchange value 66, 101, 128 
Facebook 17, 105-7, 110, 113, 114, 117, 
ipo mies 
freedom 21, 27, 28, 40, 51-55, 62, 73, 98, 
NOOMEZ 2 D Ss ratin 2, 
free software/FLOSS 65, 66, 67, 81 
Fuchs, Christian 29, 142, 152 

=== PAGE 204 ===
190 
Index 
gamification 92, 101, 130 
Gates, Bill 52, 81 
Gee, James 94 
gender 55, 99, 138, 164 
Gibson, William ix, 43 
Gramsci, Antonio 16, 22, 23, 143 
hegemony 12, 22—25, 27, 29, 31-32, 41, 
78, 81, 127, 137, 139, 142, 145-46, 147, 
157, 160 
hippie/Californian culture 35, 36 
Holloway, John 13, 14, 16, 18, 139, 149, 
165 
identity 1, 44, 55,57, 59, 101, 164 
ideology 19, 20-41, 82, 99, 104, 126, 137, 
140, 142, 144-47, 152, 157 
immaterial (labor/economy) 29, 54, 62, 82, 
100, 102, 103, 122, 126, 129 
individualism 22, 26-27, 31, 73, 76, 82, 99, 
107-9, 118, 140, 142, 147, 149, 154 
inequality 79, 81, 135-37, 140, 152, 154 
institution/institutional 7, 28, 36-39, 
49,50, 53, 67, 68-71, 80, 82, 110-11, 
114-15, 127-28, 141, 152-53, 158, 160 
Ito, Mimi 108, 112, 115 
labour 29-30, 34-35, 53, 60-61, 71, 81, 
82, 91, 93, 98, 102-3, 119, 120, 122, 126, 
129, 133, 141 
Lefebrve, Henri 25, 35, 97, 135, 161 
libertarian 25—27, 28, 31-32, 73, 164 
long tail 51, 54, 80 
Lovink, Geert 11, 13, 18, 26, 55, 81, 121, 
1522159 
magic circle (of play) 87, 96 
markets 21, 28, 30, 34, 97, 129, 150-52 
Marx, Karl 21-23, 98, 135 
mass/massification/mass socialization 37, 
57, 64, 78-80, 100, 106, 116, 117, 120, 
1SYS: 
Massumi, Brian 46, 56, 122 
meritocratic 7, 26, 76, 153 
military, militaristic 7, 25, 35, 36, 47, 88, 90, 
99, 165 
MIT (Massachusetts Institute of 
Technology) 68, 69, 136 
neoliberalism 25, 27-29, 31-32, 53, 73, 82, 
103, 123, 124, 125, 130, 136, 140, 142, 
146-47, 151, 158, 164 
new— ‘the new’/novelty 5, 17, 43 
new economy/new capitalism 19, 28-31, 
39, 82, 126, 128, 133, 140, 142, 146, 147 
nonplace 57-58 
North American culture 26, 50, 73 
open courses/MOOCs 41, 67, 69, 80, 82, 
Data 
Open Educational Resources 67, 68-69, 
81 
openness 36, 66, 70-75, 82, 127 
open source 66, 77, 79 
optimism 5, 9-10, 13-16, 32, 77, 143 
orthodoxy 2, 4, 12, 20-21, 32, 38-39, 103, 
1126; 135; 1375146 
participation 19, 45, 76-78, 82, 91, 95, 
106-22, 133, 136, 141-42, 153, 156, 
159, 161, 163 
pessimism 8, 9, 13-16, 19, 41, 142—43, 
165 
play 45, 84-104 
politics 3-4, 9, 18-19, 74, 115, 139, 147, 
149,152, 158, 162 
power 2—5, 19-22, 33, 40, 57-59, 63, 
65-67, 75-79, 98, 115, 122, 126, 
136-40, 146, 148, 152, 156-57, 160 
privatization 29, 129, 144, 161 
public debate/public understanding/ 
publicity 154-57 
public good 70, 75, 125, 135, 140, 152, 
154, 159 
rationalization 34, 61, 96, 97-98, 104, 117, 
119 
regulation 34, 58, 152, 158-60 
representation 43, 47, 56, 58-59 
reproduction 1, 21, 29, 77, 82, 130, 136, 
138, 164 
resistance/resistant behavior 19, 65, 104, 
130, 145—48, 157 
Tiska LOZ 127142" 1505S 
Sennett, Richard 26, 72, 76, 119, 141, 
156-57, 160 
serious games 89—90 
sharing 52, 65, 66, 68, 72, 107—9, 117 
simulation 7, 44-47, 51, 56-57, 90 
Stallman, Richard 65 
state (regulation of technology, markets) 
26, 27-28, 34, 127, 153, 154, 158-60 
surveillance 58-60, 164 

=== PAGE 205 ===
teachers 33, 52-53, 59-62, 115, 153 
techno-fundamentalism 37—38 
‘technology enhanced learning’ 4, 11, 
NAN} 
total pedagogization of society 133-34 
Twitter 17, 41, 106-7, 110, 116 
virtual classroom 47, 54, 56, 134 
virtuality 42-3, 55-56, 62 
Index 
191 
virtual learning environment 43, 46, 48, 
50, 51, 54, 57-61 
virtual school/cyber school 48-51, 56, 62 
virtual world/Second Life 44, 49-51, 54, 55, 56 
Wikipedia 1, 106, 113, 116, 118 
Winner, Langdon 3, 4, 25 
YouTube 6, 8, 106-7, 111, 115, 116 

=== PAGE 206 ===
Taylor & Francis 
eBooks 
FOR LIBRARIES 
Over 22,000 eBook titles in the Humanities, 
Social Sciences, STM and Law from some of the 
world’s leading imprints. 
Choose from a range of subject packages or create your own! 
Free MARC records 
COUNTER-compliant usage statistics 
Flexible purchase and pricing options 
Off-site, anytime access via Athens or referring URL 
Print or copy pages or chapters 
Full content search 
; 
Bookmark, highlight and annotate text 
> 
> 
> 
> 
> 
> 
> 
> Access to thousands of pages of quality research 
at the click of a button 
For more information, pricing enquiries or to order 
a free trial, contact your local online sales team. 
UK and Rest of World: online.sales@tandf.co.uk 
US, Canada and Latin America: 
e-reference@taylorandfrancis.com 
wv 
O43 
os 
aa 
aaa 
ALPSP Award for 
. 
A M PUBLISHER 
(ws) Taylor & Francis A:feYel3 
eR 
2009 Finalist 
Taylor 
& Francis Group 
spendortesty 
A flexible and dynamic resource for teaching, learning and research. 

=== PAGE 207 ===
A 
K 
= 
7 
. 
wuts 
ee 

=== PAGE 208 ===
x 
¢ , ae e = ra! 
; 7 
: ‘We - 
we ASive ayes iain 
i 
oe 
2 
7 
: ae v3 
= ab iit 
eS 
ye 
Lew 
ie 
: a 
ae 
' 
Tha. 
a 
: 
“ 
eT 
ve 
—- 
7 
i... 
~ 
7 
~, 
—— 
—_ 
> 

=== PAGE 209 ===

=== PAGE 210 ===

=== PAGE 211 ===
a 
te 
®@ 
SA 
er 0s. saya 
(Pecie 

=== PAGE 212 ===
IYO AT 
An environmentally friendly book printed and bound in England by www.printondemand-worldwide.com 
PEFC Certified 
This product is 
from sustainably 
managed forests 
and controlled 
sources 
7) = 5 ae 
PEFC/16-33-415 
This book is made of chain-of-custody materials; FSC materials for the cover and PEFC materials for the text pages. 
#0165 - 130516 - CO - 229/152/11 - PB - 9780415708005 

=== PAGE 213 ===

=== PAGE 214 ===
EDUCATION 
“Beginning with Thomas Edison’s 1913 proclamation that motion picture machines would replace 
books in the schools, a never-ending stream of boosters and self-styled reformers have sought to 
‘revolutionize’ education through massive infusions of technology. Neil Selwyn’s masterful study 
examines today’s leading contenders — social media, gaming, open source and others — revealing 
the dubious ideological, economic and political agendas at the basis of their schemes. Clearly the 
best book on educational technology of this generation, it will shake the digital establishment to 
its core.” 
—Langdon Winner, author of The Whale and the Reactor, and Thomas Phelan Professor of 
Humanities and Social Sciences, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute, USA 
“Distrusting Educational Technology 
is exactly the kind of book that anyone concerned with major 
current trends in educational reform, policy and practice needs at this time. It illuminates crucial 
questions and raises important cautions that tend to be ignored as we all too often assume that 
a technology-driven education will solve most of our problems. Neil Selwyn has much to teach us 
about the dangers of easy technical solutions to complex social and educational problems.” 
—Michael W. Apple, author of Can Education Change Society?, and John Bascom Professor of 
Curriculum and Instruction and Educational Policy Studies, University of Wisconsin, Madison, USA 
Distrusting Educational Technology critically explores the optimistic consensus that has arisen 
around the use of digital technology in education. Drawing on a variety of theoretical and empirical 
perspectives, this book shows how apparently neutral forms of educational technology have actually 
served to align educational provision and practices with neo-liberal values, thereby eroding the nature 
of education as a public good and moving it instead toward the individualistic tendencies of twenty- 
first-century capitalism. 
Following a wide-ranging interrogation of the ideological dimensions of educational technology, 
this book examines in detail specific types of digital technology in use in education today, including 
virtual education, ‘open’ courses, digital games and social media. It then concludes with specifir 
recommendations for fairer forms of educational technology. An ideal read for anyone interested in th 
fast-changing nature of contemporary education, Distrusting Educational Technology comprises = 
ambitious and much-needed critique. 
= ul 
Ill 
TT
af 
KR-
Neil Selwyn is Professor of Education at Monash University, Australia. 
Cover image: © Juliet Sheath 
ISBN 978-0-415-70800-5 
415"708005 
adic ae 
Taylor 
& Francis Group 
Routledge 
www.routledge.com 
anir 
| 

